
Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note, whilst
    more significant amendments have been listed at the end of the text.
    Superscript characters are shown within {braces}. Punctuation within
    the section headings, though inconsistent, remains as published.




                     PEACHEY'S
                    ROYAL GUIDE
                        TO
               WAX FLOWER MODELLING.


    "God might have made the earth bring forth
      Enough for great and small,
    The oak tree and the cedar tree
      Without a flower at all.

    "Then wherefore, wherefore, were they made?
        *      *      *      *      *      *

    "To comfort man--to whisper hope,
      Whene'er his faith is dim;
    For whoso careth for the flowers
      Will much more care for HIM."




ADVERTISEMENT.


MRS. PEACHEY being, for the reasons stated in this work, compelled to
circumscribe the giving of lessons, if not to discontinue instructions
altogether in a few months, the book will, therefore, under any
circumstances, be indispensable.




[Illustration: J. Gardner & C{o}. Zinc. 86 Hatton Garden.]




                            THE
                        ROYAL GUIDE
                            TO
                   WAX FLOWER MODELLING.


                            BY
                       MRS. PEACHEY,
                  Artiste to Her Majesty.


    "For _not alone_ to please the sense of _smell_,
    Or charm the sight, are flowers to mankind given,--
    A thousand sanctities do them invest,
    And bright associations hallow them!
    Which to the cultivated intellect
    May give delight, and all the heart improve."


                          LONDON:
            PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY MRS. PEACHEY,
                  ARTISTE TO HER MAJESTY,
               AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
                         MDCCCLI.




                       TO
               THE PRINCESS ROYAL
                       OF
                    ENGLAND,

        AS A TOKEN OF LOYAL AND GRATEFUL
                ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
 FOR THE SPONTANEOUS AND FOSTERING PATRONAGE OF
       HER ROYAL HIGHNESS'S AUGUST PARENT

                   THE QUEEN;

    THE ROYAL GUIDE TO WAX FLOWER MODELLING
         IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
            BY HER ROYAL HIGHNESS'S
                  MOST OBLIGED
          AND OBEDIENT HUMBLE SERVANT,

                 EMMA PEACHEY,
            ARTISTE TO HER MAJESTY.




PREFACE.


The Editor of this work, by Her Majesty's Artiste, MRS. PEACHEY, fairly
entitled the ROYAL GUIDE TO WAX FLOWER MODELLING, would fain leave the
introduction, written by the same hand which rivals nature in her
varying adornments, to unfold its historic, its poetic, its moral, and
its suggestive graces--for it combines these; but having accepted the
part, without which, since the days of Plato, no book is deemed
complete, he essays a few prefatory observations and remarks.

Brevity, it has been said, is the soul of wit; but we may be brief when
we know what is to follow, and for whom the following pages are
designed.

Our fair readers will intuitively perceive that the scope of the
instructive portion of this self-commending little volume is to
facilitate their acquisition of an accomplishment at once royal and
feminine in its origin and progress, and therefore worthy of their
attention.

This elegant art requires but the fairy touch of a delicate hand to fill
each available space in the chamber or drawing-room with the most
perfect and beautiful imitations of the flower-garden.

    "The morning flowers display their sweets,
      And gay their silken leaves unfold,
    As careless of the noontide heats,
      As fearless of the winter cold.

    "Nipped by the wind's unkindly blast,
      Parched by the sun's directer ray,
    The momentary glories waste,
      The short-lived beauties die away."

Unaffected by change or climate, wax flower modelling perpetuates the
transient glories of the floral seasons; places all the tender varieties
under the immediate glance of the ever gratified eye of the artist, who
can thus in the depth of winter exhibit to an admiring foreign guest the
exotics of the far hemisphere, or the indigenous plants of her own loved
land.

Who that has watched by the side of an invalid mother, would not feel an
exalted pleasure in creating around her the magical representations of
those flowerets and rosebuds her maternal hand was wont to rear? Who, in
such a moment of ministering affection, would not feel how sweet the
reward of a father's love, as his approving gaze spoke more than many
words his thanks to the duteous child returning the early care of the
fond partner of his griefs and joys? Contemplating such a scene as this,
one cannot refrain from citing the language of the poet:--

    "O! if there be a tear,
    From passion's dross refined and clear;
    A tear so limpid and so meek,
    It would not stain an angel's cheek;
    'Tis that which pious fathers shed
    Upon a duteous daughter's head."

The copious table of contents possesses great attraction for persons of
refined taste, embracing every variety of flower usually modelled in
wax: its arrangement is calculated to lead the learner, by easy steps,
from the most simple to the most elaborate accomplishment of a very
delightful task.

The sketch of her artistic life, with which the talented though
unpretending authoress has favoured the public, cannot fail to prove
useful and encouraging to the beginner, as it fully justifies the good
old proverb, that "where there is a will, there is a way;" and that way
is clearly and forcibly pointed out in the ROYAL GUIDE, so as to direct
with perfect ease the willing fingers of the modeller to the attainment
of her object, to excel in giving form and substance to her innate
perceptions of the beautiful. Nor is this a selfish pleasure. These
productions of skilled labour--if we may apply the word labour to an
amusement--please the beholder, as they do the mind which calls forth
the exquisite fancy which pencils these flowers.

The unanimous verdict of the Press will be found recorded at the end of
the instructions. It is a remarkable fact, that so many Journals, giving
in their separate awards, should have all concurred in opinion. This
opinion is highly favourable to the Artiste and the art. The very
language in which it is couched partakes of floweriness--if we may be
pardoned for coining a word to express our meaning; indeed, we strongly
commend for perusal these elegant notices of the Press; the writers
evidently have been influenced by national considerations; for they
speak of what they have seen as those convinced that, although there may
be several wax flower modellers, there is but one MRS. PEACHEY--Her
Majesty's Artiste, and an Englishwoman.

It is with no insular feeling that we express the same sentiment; but,
nevertheless, we do feel it to be something to boast of, that our
countrywomen will not have to learn the art of Wax Flower Modelling from
foreigners, many of whom however have been amongst the now nearly 50,000
visitors attracted to the collection, by the notices of the Press, and
who have expressed equal approbation.

The ROYAL GUIDE is essentially a domestic national instructor. But its
teaching will not be bounded by our island shores. We venture to
predict, that the ROYAL GUIDE TO WAX FLOWER MODELLING will, ere long,
establish for itself a more than European fame.

The Editor would now conclude the task he has undertaken, and performed,
as well as more immediate professional calls upon his time would permit,
to the best of his abilities; but, beyond changing or transposing a word
or term here and there, introducing some poetic gems, and correcting the
press, he does not claim any merit for the work from his hands, that
properly belongs to the Authoress, who has been called into the field,
and to whom the reader is now fairly introduced, as to a pleasing and
accomplished instructress in this Art.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE
 Advantage of wax flower modelling over other fancy work               8
 Anecdote--Bridal                                                     32
 Anemone                               _Anemone Hortensis_            20
 Art of modelling wax flowers introduced into England                  4
 Awards of the press                                                  61

 Blossom                                                              43
 Botanical words, explanation of                                      13
 Bouquets--her Majesty's marriage                                     32
 Brushes, method of applying them                                     13
 Brushes, how to cleanse                                              13

 Cactus                                                               53
 Call for the book                                                     1
 Camellia, Variegated                  _Variegata_                    50
 Carnation                             _Dianthus_                     35
 Chatsworth                                                           58
 Crocus                                _Crocus Luteus_                16
 Crystal Palace                                                       58
 Curling pins and scissors, use of                                    12

 Dahlia                                _Dahlia_                       48
 Daisy                                 _Bellis Perennis_              23
 Directions for mixing colours                                        11
 Dry colouring, objections to                                          7

 Exhibition, (Great)                                                  58
 Extract from family letters of his Grace the Duke of Devonshire       4

 Foliage, Instructions for                                            56
 Forget-me-not                         _Myosotis_                     40
 Flowers, mounting of, etc.                                           55
 Flowers, various, to be described                                    15
 Floral life                                                          15
 Flowering seasons, the                                               15
 Fuchsia                               _Fuchsia Fulgens_              38
 Fuchsia, Crimson                      _Fuchsia Coccinea_             39

 Geranium, Pink                        _Pelargonium_                  40
 Geranium, Scarlet                                                    42
 Grouping Flowers                                                     54

 Her Majesty's patronage                                               2
 Hollyhock, Lemon                      _Althæa_                       53
 Honeysuckle                           _Caprifolium_                  37
 How to cleanse the scissors, pins, and marbles                       13

 Introduction                                                          1

 Jasmine, Yellow                       _Jasminum Revolutum_           28
 Jasmine, White                        _Jasminum Officinale_          29
 Jasmine, Cape                         _Gardenia_                     29
 Jonquil                                                              23

 Kalmia                                _Kalmia Latifolia_             28
 Kew Gardens                                                           8

 Lilac Rhododendron                                                   26
 Lily, White                           _Lilium Alba_                  44
 Lily, Pink-spotted                    _Lilium Lancifolium_           45
 Lily, White Water                     _Nymphea Alba_                 46
 Lily, Yellow Water                    _Nymphea, Yellow_              47
 Lily, Blue Water                      _Nymphea, Blue_                47

 Materials required for wax flower modelling                           8
 Mignonette, (origin of)              _Reseda Odorata_                42
 Moral view of the art                                                 4
 Myrtle                                _Myrtus Communis_              36

 Narcissus                                                            23
 Nature, how to copy from                                             14

 Orange Blossom                        _Citrus_                       43

 Passion Flower                        _Passiflora_                   51
 Primrose                              _Primula_                      17
 Professional sketch, etc.                                             3
 Progress of the art                                                   5
 Pupils--necessarily limited--testimony of former pupils               2
 Purposes to which the materials are applied                           9

 Regent's Park Gardens                                                 8
 Rhododendron                                                         26
 Roses--instructions                                                  30
 Rose, Cabbage                         _Rosa Centifolia_              30
 Rose, Moss                            _Rosa Muscosa_                 32
 Rose, White                           _Rosa Alba_                    32
 Rose, Damask                          _Rosa Damascena_               33
 Rose, Sweet-scented Tea               _Rosa Safrano_                 34
 Rose, Yellow                          _Rosa, Cloth of Gold_          34
 Rose, Austrian Briar                  _Rosa Lutea_                   35

 Salvia                                _Salvia Patens_                49
 Seringa                               _Oleineæ_                      44
 Sir Joseph Paxton                                                    58
 Snowdrop                              _Galanthus Nivalis_            17

 The _Lady's Newspaper_, articles in                                   2
 The Queen's warrant                                                   3
 The _Manchester Examiner_ answered                                    6
 The colours                                                          10
 Tulip, Van Thol                       _Tulipa Præcox_                22
 Tulip, Summer                                                        22

 Victoria Regia, The                   _Victoria Regia_               57
 Violet, White                         _Viola Odorata_                19
 Violet, Purple                        _Viola Purpurea_               20
 Visitors                                                             59

 Wallflower                            _Cheiranthus Cheiri_           25
 Wax Flowers, as ornaments for the hair                               55
 Wax, artistically prepared                                            6




[Illustration]




PEACHEY'S ROYAL GUIDE

TO

WAX FLOWER MODELLING.


Before I commence my course of instruction in the fascinating art of
representing in wax the floral beauties of nature, I deem it necessary
to prelude by a brief explanation as to my pretensions, and the cause of
my offering such instructions to the notice of the public.

I have constantly applied myself, during the last fourteen years, in
strictly copying from nature every flower that has come under my notice,
from the simple wild flowers of our hallowed native fields, to the
latest and rarest exotics brought home by our most eminent collectors. I
have also been materially assisted in this particular branch of my art,
by the nobility and gentry having kindly granted me the indulgence of
selecting as copies, from their conservatories, aught that I might
consider as valuable additions to my specimens.

I have been frequently asked by my pupils to publish such a work as the
present; but diffidence, amounting perhaps to a weakness, has hitherto
prevented me from even momentarily exchanging the pencil of the artist
for the pen of the author:

    "Authors, you know, of greatest fame,
    Through modesty, suppress their name."

In the year 1847, I wrote several articles for the _Lady's Newspaper_,
in the shape of instruction in Wax Flower Modelling, which articles
appeared under the initials of "E. H., late pupil of Mrs. Peachey." I
must confess I felt much gratified upon hearing my pupils, as well as
other ladies, speak of these articles in terms of commendation. I trust
I may be pardoned for this little piece of deception, and beg to remind
those who might regard the "ingenious device" with censure, that Sir
Walter Scott and many other writers of celebrity have done the same. If
great and talented persons shrink from making their compositions known
as their own creations, it is not surprising that I, who have no
pretension to literature, should be equally tenacious of my incognito.

I have at this period determined upon publishing a book of instructions,
purely in consequence of feeling quite inadequate to receive, as pupils,
the numerous applicants that daily visit me, and express much anxiety to
be initiated into my method of modelling and grouping.

They are two distinct things--to accomplish an art well, and to impart
it to others. I hope I may not be considered egotistical in boldly
asserting that, as an instructress, I stand pre-eminent. I feel proud,
most proud, in having received repeated assurances from the
distinguished and numerous ladies who have placed themselves under my
tuition, that my method of teaching is such as to enable the most
inexperienced to acquire with facility a perfect knowledge of this
pleasing art.

The distinguished patronage I have from the first received at the hands
of her Most Gracious Majesty, must surely convey to the minds of all,
that I have a right to lay claim to artistic skill.

When I first commenced the agreeable occupation of imitating nature, I
had not the slightest idea of ultimately making it a profession. My
anxious desire, I may say, my ambition, was to produce something that
might be considered worthy the notice of our most Gracious Queen, who at
the period I allude to, 1837, had just ascended the throne.

A spirit of loyalty had been fostered in me from my earliest infancy;
and a pardonable glow of pleasure always animates me, at the remembrance
that I am the daughter of an old officer, who served as surgeon in the
British army the long period of fifty years. The result of my wishes has
been great success. Our beloved Sovereign, ever ready to encourage
talent or industry in any form, condescended to permit a bouquet, which
I designed and executed for her inspection (in token of my loyalty), to
be placed as an ornament in one of the royal palaces. This was indeed an
honour I had scarcely dared to anticipate. Two years after the period
alluded to, the Queen became acquainted with the fact, that a change of
circumstances had compelled me to make the art of wax flower modelling a
source of profit. Her Majesty, unsolicited by any, spoke to the then
Lord Chamberlain relative to a warrant of appointment being granted to
me; and I forthwith received the Royal Letters Patent, being the first
in this country who enjoyed the privilege of being styled "Artist in Wax
Flowers to Her Majesty." I hope I may not be deemed prolix in giving
these particulars; it is not from any feeling of vanity, but from
gratitude due to the high power that encouraged my talent in its
infancy. The auspicious patronage I received gave an impetus to my
labours; and I have from that royal day taxed my energies to the utmost,
to prove that my works deserved the high honour that had been conferred
upon them.

As this work is intended for the perusal of the young, as well as the
adult, I trust I may be pardoned for pausing a moment to dwell upon the
all-wise dispensations of Providence. The talent which inspired me would
have been useless, had not the "Giver of all good" discovered to me the
knowledge that I possessed it; and I wish to impress upon the notice of
my young friends and pupils, the advantage, I may say necessity, of
embracing every opportunity of improving any talent committed to their
charge; for my life has shown that what is acquired as an accomplishment
or amusement, may one day become of vital importance to them.

It occurs to me, that it may not be uninteresting to many of my readers,
to become acquainted with the period and by whom


THE ART OF MODELLING FLOWERS IN WAX WAS BROUGHT INTO ENGLAND.

I consequently subjoin an extract from Miss Strickland's Life of Mary
Beatrice, second consort of James II., A.D. 1686.

    "The beautiful imitations of natural flowers in wax which have
    lately afforded an attractive exercise for the taste and ingenuity
    of many of our youthful countrywomen, were first introduced into
    England by the mother of Mary Beatrice, as a present to her royal
    daughter; as we find by the following passage in a contemporary
    letter from a correspondent of the Lady Margaret Russell, which
    gives some information relative to the ornamental works then in
    vogue among ladies of rank, in the court of Mary Beatrice.

    "'In gum flowers, Mrs. Booth tells me you and she is to doe
    something in that work, which I suppose must be extraordinary. I
    hope it will be as great perfection as the fine WAX WORK ye queen
    has, of nun's work, of fruit and flowers, that her mother did put up
    for her, and now she has 'em both for her chapel and her rooms. I do
    not know whether they be the four seasons of the year, but they say
    they are done so well, that they that see 'em can hardly think 'em
    other than the real.'"[A]

[A] In the collection of private family letters of the Duke of
Devonshire, at Chiswick Lodge: copied by courteous permission of his
Grace.

From the year last named until 1736 I have been unable to trace any
knowledge of this elegant art.

When wax flowers were again introduced by an Italian, they were clumsily
manufactured in comparison to those seen in the present age of
improvement; for I had the opportunity of inspecting some of their
"miserable remains" but a few years since. Still I must acknowledge I
discovered some taste and much ingenuity in their construction, and am
not too proud to own that I benefited even by examining these very
inferior productions. I feel quite satisfied that the art of wax flower
modelling is almost still in its infancy. It is no longer regarded as an
amusement only. It is enumerated with other accomplishments essential to
female education. It assists botanical studies, and promotes the views
of flower painters, either in oil or water colours; even in drawing, wax
flowers will be found excellent auxiliaries, far preferable as copies to
the even surface of plates. I have myself been much gratified by
furnishing flowers in wax to some of our first flower painters, who have
assured me that they have proved of great utility, in cases where the
evanescent properties of the flower of nature prevented the possibility
of committing their similitude to canvas ere their beauty had faded. It
affords me no small degree of satisfaction also, that my flowers were
found useful as copies for some of the beautiful carved work in the late
great and ever memorable Exhibition. I have also supplied them as
illustrations to botanical lectures.

In thus referring to the utility of wax flowers, I am reminded of a
partially unfavourable prejudice which has lately sprung up, from an
article which first appeared in a Manchester paper, and which was
subsequently copied into _The Times_, and other papers. It is possible
ladies may be induced to abandon this delightful amusement, upon reading
such a statement as the subjoined extract:--

    "THE DANGER OF MODELLING IN WAX.--Few persons, especially, perhaps,
    of the many young ladies who are now practising the very pleasing
    art of modelling fruits, flowers, &c., in wax, at all suspect the
    great danger in which they are placed from the poisonous nature of
    the colouring matter of the wax which they handle so unsuspectingly.
    The white wax, for instance, contains white lead; the green, copper;
    the yellow, chrome yellow and vermilion--strong poisons all; while
    many other kinds of wax are equally poisonous, and, therefore
    dangerous. There are very many persons who are aware of the intense
    sufferings, for very many years past, of Mr. W. Bally, phrenologist
    and modeller in wax, in which latter branch he has laboured for 24
    or 25 years, three of them as teacher of the art, at the Manchester
    Mechanics' Institution. Mr. Bally has been at times completely
    paralysed, and is now and has long been very nearly so, especially
    in the hands and arms; and he has also been afflicted with extensive
    ulceration of the throat, and has almost totally lost his voice.
    Both himself and his medical adviser, after a long attention to his
    symptoms, are satisfied that the primary cause of his affliction is
    the extent to which the subtle poisons in the wax with which he has
    worked have been absorbed into his system through the pores of his
    hands, while the disease has been generally strengthened, and one
    part of it accounted for, by the occasional application of his
    fingers to his lips while at work. Mr. Bally says, that he has known
    several cases in which young ladies have been attacked with partial
    paralysis of the hands and arms, after having devoted some time to
    the practice of modelling; but at the time he had no suspicion of
    the cause. As all the requisite colours can be obtained from
    vegetable matter, and as the use of mineral colouring seems to lead
    to such deplorable results, the subject should be carefully
    investigated by those working with coloured wax."--_Manchester
    Examiner._

It is not my intention to contradict an assertion so boldly set forth. I
have no doubt the editor of the _Manchester Examiner_ had some grounds
for the article; but I think it right to state _that_ which I can
prove--namely, that the wax _artistically manufactured by me_ is so
perfectly harmless, that for the last fourteen years I have had it in my
hands, upon an average from twelve to fourteen hours every day (Sunday
excepted), and never in the slightest degree experienced any
inconvenience or ill effects.

The small portion of colour I introduce undergoes a chemical process,
which neutralizes entirely any deleterious properties appertaining to
the few colours required to be used. It is quite unnecessary to
introduce white lead at all. I was assisted by a practical German
chemist to prepare borax, in such a manner, as to entirely supersede
white lead. Now most of my readers will be able to testify how perfectly
harmless must be borax, it being one of the drugs so constantly used
with honey, and recommended by the faculty as an excellent remedy for
canker in the mouth. I am, as I have previously stated, the daughter of
a medical man, and am perfectly acquainted with the danger attending the
absorption of mineral colours into the system: under these
circumstances, it is not likely that I should myself use that which
would be injurious. Ladies, who desire to enjoy the recreation of wax
flower modelling, may indulge in the amusement with perfect safety, if
they purchase the wax of me. At the same time, I wish it to be perfectly
understood, that I do not insinuate, or attribute aught against any
other person or persons who prepare wax for sale.

I DECIDEDLY OBJECT to the dry colours being rubbed into the wax with the
fingers. I invariably apply the colours with a brush. It must be
injurious to close the pores of the skin, even were the powders so used
innocuous; but to say nothing of the danger of the method alluded to, it
is a most dirty occupation, and ladies would not like to see their hands
dyed with carmine, Prussian blue, or chromes. Such a method of tinting
is likely to prejudice ladies against the work altogether; besides
which, it renders the flowers much more fragile. The only time I ever
use dry powder is in the form of bloom (peculiarly prepared arrowroot),
which I throw on lightly, but never rub in. Having endeavoured to prove
that there are no dangerous results likely to accrue from this pleasing
occupation, I will proceed to shew


THE ADVANTAGE OF WAX MODELLING, OVER OTHER FANCY WORK.

And one great consideration is that the sight is not likely to be
injured. The eye does not require to be fixed; it does not occupy so
much attention as to prevent conversation, nor need the _body be
bent_,--a matter of much importance with growing girls, many having
suffered affections of the chest, and others disfigured for life,
through continually stooping to frame work.

There is no monotony in this agreeable employment, for new varieties are
continually springing up in nature; and a visit to the Botanical Gardens
at Kew, or the Regent's Park, will at all seasons afford some fresh
specimen. In referring to the former gardens, I cannot forbear
expressing the deep sense of obligation I feel due from the public, and
artists particularly--being myself one of them,--for the boon bestowed
upon us by those powers who afford such facility for inspecting--free of
charge--all that is lovely, choice, and rare. It is perfectly clear,
according to my method, that the most elegant drawing room might be
used, without suffering in its appearance during its operations. I would
merely recommend that the table should be covered with paper, so that
all small pieces might be kept together, and easily removed.


I will now proceed to name the


MATERIALS REQUIRED FOR WAX FLOWER MODELLING.

WAX--white, yellow, orange, pink, and several shades of green.

Two steel pins with china heads (different sizes).

One ivory pin, with large head.

Eleven bottles of powder; consisting of scarlet, bright crimson, dark
crimson, lemon, yellow, orange, dark orange, light blue, middle blue,
dark blue, and white.

Twelve large brushes.

Two small brushes.

Twelve saucers.

Three skeins of white wire.

Two skeins of green do.

Two pieces of white marble, 3 to 4 inches square, 3/4 inch thick.

One pair of sharp pointed scissors.

One cake of smalt.

One cake of sepia.

One cake of crimson lake.

One bottle of down.


Having given a list of the materials required for the elegant and
charming amusement of "Wax Flower Modelling," I deem it expedient to
make a few remarks relative to the properties of, and


PURPOSES TO WHICH THE MATERIALS ARE APPLIED.

Without wishing to derogate from the merit of others, or retaining to
myself the exclusive ability of vending the purest wax and the best of
other articles to be used in obtaining a faithful representation of
nature, I think it necessary to state, that I offer to the public
materials only of the very best quality; consequently, I take the prices
of other persons' goods as no criterion or standard for mine. The wax is
manufactured under my own immediate superintendence; soft, and perfectly
dull on one side. It is sufficiently opaque of itself not to require
being painted on the wrong side for white flowers, which is the case
with common wax. I likewise prepare wax, called "double wax," it is
twice as thick as the ordinary wax. When the single wax is used double,
the two shining sides should be placed together. It has sheets of tissue
paper placed between it to keep each sheet of wax smooth and straight (a
great advantage,) for when this is not done (though the wax may be
good), the edges are often wrinkled, and a great deal of waste is the
consequence.

THE COLOURS--eleven in number, submitted for sale on my counters, 160,
161, 162, 163, Soho Bazaar, are of the very best quality, and ground
down particularly fine in spirits. I recommend saucers instead of a flat
pallet, as it is not necessary to use up at once all the colour that is
mixed; and by keeping each colour distinct in separate saucers, much
waste is prevented.

Twelve brushes are indispensable; each to be confined to the use of one
colour. Two small sable brushes are for veining, as in geraniums.

The large ivory pin is required for the Victoria Regia, water-lily, and
other large flowers.

The two smaller pins are to be used for similar purposes, on flowers of
less magnitude.

The cake colours are never to be used alone, but rubbed down with the
powder, as will be shown in my instructions for mixing colours.

The large white wire is to be used as stems for flowers, such as dahlia,
camellia, &c.

The second and finest white wire to support the petals.

The green wire, Nos. 1 and 2, are for stems of various flowers.

The square pieces of marble are of great utility in rolling fine
filaments, or rays, for the various kinds of passion flowers. It is a
much quicker and cleaner method than rolling them with the fingers.


I think it necessary to give some


DIRECTIONS FOR MIXING COLOURS.

Place the powder required in a saucer: add a few drops of water, and rub
the same with a brush for some time; as friction materially improves the
brilliancy of tint. The colour should be mixed as thick as cream, but a
very small portion taken into the brush at one time. As the brushes are
large, they absorb a large quantity of colour; consequently, the brush
used to mix the colour with, must be pressed upon the edge of the saucer
several times to cleanse it.

The cake paint is used with the powder colours for fine veining, and
when a second colour is required to be placed over another; as I shall
show in my instruction for the rich dahlia purpurea. I have a great
objection to mixing gum water with the colours. I use it only previous
to throwing on down, such as in the calyx of geranium, primrose, &c.

A rich crimson is produced by the application of the crimson powder upon
pink wax.

A darker crimson, by adding a little of the darkest crimson powder to
the former. If a deeper crimson still be required, add a little of the
middle blue.

A pale pink is obtained by applying crimson powder with a small portion
of white, laid on the wax very thin.

A light orange scarlet, as in fuchsia fulgens, is acquired by mixing a
minute portion of scarlet powder with the bright crimson.

Scarlet for geranium; a larger portion of the scarlet with the crimson.

Different shades of scarlet are also produced by laying the crimson
powder upon different shades of wax, namely, lemon, yellow, and orange.

A purple (as in violet), is produced by mixing the second blue with a
lesser portion of the bright crimson powder.

A deeper purple, as in the centre of the anemone, is obtained by the
combination of the crimson powder with the deepest blue.

Various shades of lilac and peach colours are produced by a careful
admixture of the bright crimson, middle blue, and white.

A primrose colour is obtained by using my lemon powder (a beautiful
preparation), upon white wax.

A rich brown, as in wall-flower, requires a mixture of cake sepia with
bright crimson.

The dark velvet-purple-looking spot seen in geraniums is obtained from
mixing the cake smalt with a little bright crimson powder.

A similar tint may be obtained by mixing crimson lake, in cake, with the
middle blue.

Various shades of green are procured by combining the first or second
yellow with the darkest blue.


In noticing the


USE OF CURLING PINS AND SCISSORS,

I beg to remind my readers that these are the only instruments I deem
requisite for modelling wax flowers. Both these require to be moistened
before they are applied to the wax. Warmth as well as moisture is
essential for these. A glass of lukewarm water will answer the purpose;
but great care must be taken to shake off the surplus water; for if the
globules were to fall upon the petal, it would occasion the colour to
run.


THE METHOD OF APPLYING BRUSHES

requires to be stated; for they must not be held as a pen or pencil, but
perfectly perpendicular. Commence a short distance from the lower end of
the petals--for where the paint is applied the wax will not adhere. When
the petal is all one colour, pass the brush from you quickly and lightly
off the same on to the paper. If it is a variegated petal, bring the
brush towards you. This will enable you to soften off the edges of the
spots which are to be left free from colour. When moisture is required
in the brush, the latter must not be plunged into water, but a small
drop taken up by the handle on to the paper.


TO CLEANSE THE SCISSORS, PINS, AND MARBLES.

Dip either into boiling water, and wipe them immediately. The marbles
require to be used warm.


EXPLANATION OF BOTANICAL WORDS.

Although I do not pretend to put this forth as a "Botanical work," I
deem it necessary that I should make use of certain words in application
to forming the different parts of a flower; I shall give an explanation
of such botanical words as I must occasionally make use of in the course
of my instructions.

COROLLA signifies a flower deprived of its centre. For example: the
corolla of a rhododendron falls from its position, leaving the interior
of the flower pendent to the stem. The convolvulus has a funnel-shaped
corolla.

PETAL. This is part of the corolla, and what is termed, by the
uninformed--leaf; for instance, we hear of drying rose leaves, when in
fact it is the petals that are alluded to. The term leaf should only be
applied to the foliage.

PISTIL, or PISTILLUM, is that part of a flower which projects directly
from the centre, and is longer than the rest; we observe it in the white
lily, fuchsia, honeysuckle, etc. The enlargement at the end of the
pistil is termed stigma.

STAMENS, or STAMINA, signify the filaments that surround the pistil; and
the enlarged part at the end of each filament is called anther.

FARINA is the fine dust which is contained in the anther, and which
shows itself also outside.

CALYX is applied to the green attached to the flower. For example: the
part that is covered with moss about the rose is the calyx. Sometimes
the calyx is covered with down, as in geranium, primrose, etc.

STIGMA. The enlargement at the end of the pistillum.


HOW TO COPY FROM NATURE.

To take the pattern of a natural flower, you must remove the petals
carefully, sorting out how many there are of an equal size. Take the
shape of one out of each set, in the following manner: Place the petal
upon a sheet of writing paper, holding it firmly to the paper with the
point of the fore finger of the left hand. Take a large brush containing
a very little colour and pass it round the edge. The exact form will be
left upon the paper without tearing the edges of the petal, even though
it were unusually fragile. When the requisite flower cannot be procured,
a proper pattern can be obtained at Soho Bazaar, or at my residence, 35,
Rathbone Place, where I am happy to receive visitors, daily, from ten in
the morning till six o'clock in the evening. Place the pattern upon the
dull side of the wax, and as the grain runs the length of the same, cut
each petal accordingly, for the wax takes the paint much better in that
direction.




VARIOUS FLOWERS TO BE DESCRIBED.


FLORAL LIFE.

    "Lord, what is life? 'Tis like a flower
      That blossoms, and is gone!
    We see it flourish for an hour,
      With all its beauty on;
    But death comes, like a wintry day,
    And cuts the pretty flower away."


THE FLOWERING SEASONS.

    "Say, what impels, amid surrounding snow
    Congealed, the CROCUS' flowery bud to glow?
    Say, what retards, amid the summer blaze,
    The autumnal bud, till pale declining days?

    "The God of seasons, whose pervading power
    Controls the sun, or sheds the fleecy shower;
    He bids each flower His quickening word obey,
    Or to each lingering bloom enjoins delay."
                                            H. KIRKE WHITE.


As it will be impossible in a small volume to give instructions in all
Flowers, I shall endeavour to select such as will produce a pleasing
contrast of form and colour; at the same time, including flowers of
every season, commencing with Spring--and who does not hail the early
Flowers with delight? After a long and severe winter, the appearance of
the golden crocus and the modest snowdrop, peeping from the earth,
convey to the mind a glow of unspeakable pleasure.

    "Then wherefore had they birth?
    To minister delight to man--
    To beautify the earth."


INSTRUCTION HOW TO FORM THE CROCUS.

(CROCUS LUTEUS.) _Youthfulness._

Prepare the petals (from pattern) in double wax, choosing a bright
orange, but not too dark. Place the two shining sides of the wax
together. The inner petals are not striped, but the three outer ones
have eight or ten pencil strokes of a middle shade of green, broad
towards the lower end, and carried off to fine points; these strokes do
not extend beyond two thirds of the flower, and laid on with the sable
brush. Cup the petals very much with a large head pin (this is why they
require to be cut from double wax) so firmly that each petal produces an
egg-shaped form when united. Double a hem in a piece of wax the same as
that from which you have previously cut the petals. Prepare the stamina
from this piece of wax by snipping the proper number. The hem at the
edge of the wax is to represent the anthers; affix the stamina when so
prepared to the end of a piece of strong wire, and cover them with
farina (my second yellow powder). Place the petals round the
stamina--first, the three not painted--and the remaining three in the
intervening spaces.

The calyx is prepared in lemon wax, tinged with a little brown, and is
passed round the end of the flower. The stem covered with pale lemon
wax. The leaves narrow strips of double wax (dark green), strongly
indented with the point of the pin, and a white stripe laid smoothly on
with the small sable brush.

The above directions will answer for the crocus susianus, the cloth of
gold, striped orange, and very dark purple; besides the Scotch crocus,
striped, white, and purple.


THE SNOWDROP.

(GALANTHUS NIVALIS.) _Consolation._

    "The snowdrop, and then the violet,
    Arose from the ground with warm rain wet;
    And their breath was mixed with fresh odour sent
    From the turf, like the voice and the instrument."

This charming, pensive little flower should be prepared from double
white wax. It consists of six petals, like its companion the crocus. The
longest are left perfectly white, the others striped upon the inside
with very light green paint; and upon the opposite or exterior side of
the petal is placed a triangular green spot, near the off end. Cut a
fine green wire, three inches long, cover it with a strip of light green
wax, affix to the end the stamina, cut from yellow wax. Place round
these the striped petals, and those that are quite white immediately
between; finish off the same by placing a little double green wax at the
end of the flower, which forms the calyx; the flower-stalk is then to be
attached to a stronger stem. Where they are united place a small sheath,
cut from lemon wax, tinge round the edge with light green. The leaves
are rather narrow, not so dark as the crocus; made from double wax. The
head of the pin is merely rolled down the centre: they are attached a
short way down the stem.


THE PRIMROSE.

(PRIMULA.) _Forsaken._

    "Look on these flowers! as o'er an altar, shedding
      On Milton's page soft light from coloured urns--
    They are the links man's heart to nature wedding,
      When to her breast the prodigal returns.

    "They are from lone, wild places--forests, dingles,
      Fresh banks of many a low-voiced hidden stream;
    Where the sweet star of eve looks down and mingles
      Faint lustre with the water-lily's gleam."
                                            MRS. HEMANS.

This unassuming pretty flower has a salver-shaped corolla; but in
modelling it, I advise its being formed of five petals. Prepare the
latter in double white wax, colour them upon both sides with my lemon
powder (this is a most beautiful preparation), taking the precaution not
to carry the same to the end, or it would prevent adhesion of the wax.
With a small sable brush, form a triangular spot of deep yellow at the
lower end of the broad part of the petal. Attach to the end of a
second-size wire a piece of lemon wax, extending the same half an inch
down the stem; this is to form a foundation: the point is to be neatly
moulded, and to be seen peeping, as it were, from the centre of the
flower. The petals are curled in the following manner;--rest the petal
in the palm of the left hand, placing the side that has the triangular
spot downwards, press the third finger of the right hand in the centre,
and then upon the opposite side strongly indent with the point of the
pin. Place the five petals thus prepared round the stem previously
formed, press the petals neatly together, flattening them down a little
to give the appearance of being formed in one piece. The calyx is cut in
very light green wax, it is in one piece, vandyked at the top into five
points; in each point press the pin, and attach it afterwards round the
neck or tube of the flower. Wash the calyx with a weak solution of gum
water, using for the purpose a sable brush. Sprinkle it over, while
moist, with a little of my prepared down. The stem should look
transparent, consequently the wire must be covered with very light green
or lemon wax. For the leaf, see my general instructions upon foliage.

[Illustration]


VIOLET.

(VIOLA ODORATA.) _Modesty._

    "As the dew that moistens the rose at dawn,
      Gives the VIOLET many a tear,
    So bright in the morning of life she shone,
    That her fragrance still lives while her spirit is gone,
      Embalming her memory here."
                                            M'COMB.

    "Sweet flower! spring's earliest, loveliest gem;
      While other flowers are idly sleeping,
    Thou rear'st thy purple diadem,
      Meekly from thy seclusion peeping.

    "Thou, from the little secret mound,
      Where diamond dew-drops shine above thee,
    Scatterest thy modest fragrance round;
      And well may nature's poet love thee!

    "Thine is a short, swift reign, I know,
      But love, thy spirit still pervading,
    New violet tufts again shall blow,
      Then fade away as thou art fading;

    "And be renewed;--the hope how blest,
      (Oh, may that hope desert me never!)
    Like thee, to sleep on nature's breast,
      And wake again, to bloom for ever!"
                                            BOWRING.

    "A violet, by a mossy stone--
      Half hidden from the eye;
    Fair as a star, when only one
      Is shining in the sky."
                                  WORDSWORTH.

Prepare the petals in white wax: there are five in number. Pass the head
of a large pin firmly down the centre, so as to cup each. Cover a fine
green wire with a strip of light green wax; at the end of this affix a
small piece of orange wax, and mould it to a point, not allowing it to
be larger than a carraway seed. Dip the point of this foundation in
water, and then into the second yellow powder, which gives it the
appearance of farina. Place three petals under the foundation, and the
remaining two on the top, turning them back; bend the stalk up, and
under the three petals place a small piece of white wax, which is to be
coloured purple after it is attached. The calyx consists of five points,
and are placed round the neck of the flower.


PURPLE VIOLETS.

    "Violets, sweet tenants of the shade,
    In purple's richest pride arrayed,
      Your errand here fulfil;
    Go, bid the artist's simple stain
    Your lustre imitate in vain,
      And match your Maker's skill."

Purple violets are constructed precisely the same as the former; the
only difference that exists being that the petals require to be cut from
blue wax, and painted upon both sides with purple (bright crimson and
middle blue.)

    "Like the sweet south
    That breathes upon a bank of violets,
    (So darkly, deeply, beautifully blue,)
    Smelling and giving odours."

    "Thou smiling promise of more sunny days,
    How do I love thine unobtrusive glance!"


ANEMONE.

(ANEMONE HORTENSIS.) _Sickness._

The petals are cut from thick or double white wax. Place a piece of fine
white wire half way up each, and secure it to its position by placing a
narrow strip of white wax upon the same, rolling it down each edge with
the head of the smallest pin. Colour them from the centre to the point
with bright purple (second blue and bright crimson), the large brush to
be used, (see my directions, p. 13.) The small petals are cupped by
laying each in the palm of the left hand, and pressing it firmly with
the thumb of the right hand. The large or outside petals are curled in
the same manner, but the points turned back. The centre or foundation is
formed by passing two strips of double pink wax round the end of a
strong wire, (care must be taken at all times to double the wire down to
prevent its slipping;) mould the same to a point, leaving it broad at
the lower end; indent it strongly round with the curling pin; colour
this half way down with dark or black-looking purple, (dark blue and
crimson.)

The stamina are also formed from pink wax: first roll a whip (as in
muslin) which produces the anthers, and cut a fringe the third of an
inch deep. Wind the same around the previously formed centre, and then
brush them out with the dark purple brush that has been applied to the
foundation. When thoroughly dry, touch the ends occasionally with green;
this must be done with the sable brush. At the back of the pulp first
formed, close to the wire, affix the small petals at equal distance, and
the large ones, which turn back, in the intervening spaces. When the
anemone is in bud, it is surrounded by a calyx, but as it expands it
rises and leaves the said calyx at least one inch down the stem; it has
a fringed appearance, and is prepared from double green wax. The stem is
covered neatly with light green wax.

The anemones grow in great variety of colour, but this instruction, as
to form and centre, is applicable to all. The brilliant scarlet and
purple, contrasted with the pink, lemon, and white, form a pretty group
by themselves.


TULIP VAN THOL.

(TULIPA PRÆCOX.) _Declaration of Love._

    "Flowers are the brightest things which earth
      On her broad bosom loves to cherish;
    Gay they appear as children's mirth,
      Like fading dreams of hope they perish."
                                            PATTERSON.

Prepare the petals from double yellow wax, placing the shining sides
together, a fine white wire half way up between. Form two distinct
creases up the centre with the point of the pin; with the head of the
latter cup the broad part of the petal. Turn the edges inward towards
the point, and colour each petal upon both sides with the crimson
powder, softening off the same, and leaving a margin of the yellow free
from colour. The stamina are prepared (according to pattern), from
double yellow wax, and painted with rich brown (cake sepia and crimson),
from the broad part to the point. To a large wire affix a piece of
double green wax, cover the same with lemon wax, and press it into a
triangular form: place a strip of double green wax three quarters of an
inch from this point, to form a foundation to attach the petals to.
Place round the foundation the brown stamina previously prepared, and
then attach the petals, in rows of three or five; they vary very much in
number, some flowers being much more double than others.

The remarks in the foregoing instructions on the "Van Thol Tulip," are
also applicable to the Summer Tulip; the centre is formed the same, but
rather larger; nature must do the rest. The great beauty of the flower
in the florist's eye, consists in its being cup-shaped and round at the
base. The ground colour of the flower ought also to be very clear and
bright in the centre.


NARCISSUS.

_Permission._

    "By all those token-flowers that tell
    What words can ne'er express so well."
                                  BYRON.

Cut six petals in double white wax; indent up the centre of each with
the point of a curling pin; press against this crease upon the opposite
side, so as to produce a ribbed appearance. Pass the head of the curling
pin down on each side of the previously named crease, and press the
petals back. Cut a strip of yellow wax half an inch deep and one inch
and a half in length; plait it up at one edge, and join it round to form
a cup. To the end of a piece of middle size wire attach the stamina,
draw the same through the cup, and fasten it underneath. Take a slip of
pale green wax, and wind round the wire under the cup, to form the tube
or neck of the flower. Attach three petals in a triangular form
immediately under the cup, and the remaining three immediately between
those preceding.


THE JONQUIL

is constructed precisely the same; but use for the petals double yellow
wax instead of white, and orange wax for the cup instead of yellow.


THE DAISY.

(BELLIS PERENNIS.) _Innocence._

Whilst culling the sweet and early flowers, I cannot permit myself to
pass the daisy, that pretty and simple production of nature, so
emblematical of innocence, and which has been immortalized by poets,
ancient and modern.

THE DAISY.

    "A nymph demure, of lowly port,
    Or sprightly maiden, of Love's court,
    In thy simplicity the sport
      Of all temptations;
    A queen in crown of rubies dressed,
    A starveling in a scanty vest,
    Are all, as seems to suit thee best,
      Thy appellations.

    "I see thee glittering from afar,
    And then thou art a pretty star;
    Not quite so fair as many are
      In heaven above thee;
    Yet like a star, with glittering crest,
    Self-poised, in air thou seem'st to rest--
    May peace come never to his nest,
      Who shall reprove thee.

    "Sweet flower--for by that name at last,
    When all my reveries are past,
    I call thee, and to that cleave fast,
      Sweet silent creature,
    That breath'st with me in sun and air;
    Do thou, as thou art wont, repair
    My heart with gladness, and a share
      Of thy meek nature."
                                  WORDSWORTH.

The daisy may be made entirely white, crimson tipped, or crimson all
over the petals: the latter are cut in single white wax, a strip at once
the width of a sheet of wax. After the petals are coloured, the pin is
deeply indented into each, some in fact are made quite round. The flower
grows single and double, so that there is no decided number required;
this must be left to the taste of the copyists; but if they prefer the
double flower, the eye or centre is scarcely visible. On the contrary,
if it is a single flower that is to be imitated, the eye must be
increased. To form the latter, take a sheet of yellow wax, fold it at
the end the eighth of an inch deep, hold it between the thumb and finger
of the left hand, and with the point of the curling pin indent the edge
closely the whole length, and pass round the end of the middle wire,
letting it rise a little in the centre. The petals are then attached
very closely, and as many as form the double or single flower, whichever
may be preferred. The calyx is green, and placed on similarly to the
petals.

    "Wee, modest, crimson-tipped flower
    *     *     *     *     thou bonnie gem."
                                  BURNS.


WALL-FLOWER.

_Fidelity in misfortune._

    "How oft doth an emblem-bud silently tell
    What language could never speak half so well."

Cut from bright orange four wax petals for each blossom: colour the
edges, and vein each a rich brown (crimson powder and cake sepia). Press
the finger in the centre of every petal, for the purpose of giving a
crumpled appearance.

Use a piece of middle size wire; cover it with green wax, and affix to
the end four stamina, made in the following manner: Double along the end
of a sheet of lemon wax (a narrow fold); cut the stamina short and fine;
colour the ends with my lemon powder. Place the petals immediately
under; putting them on so as to form a square. The calyx is cut from
green wax passed round the tube of the flower, and coloured afterwards
with the same brush that has been used for the flower. The buds are made
of solid wax; some green, others orange; and painted with the rich brown
in various shades. In the largest buds, leave the orange points free
from paint, at the point peeping from beneath the dark calyx.

There cannot be a more natural looking flower than the last described,
if modelled neatly, and well in regard to colour; at the same time, I
must remind my pupils that none can look worse if badly executed.

Having now submitted what I consider a fair selection from spring
flowers, I will proceed to those which we may observe at a later period,
commencing with the rhododendron. This is one of a class of flowers
which I admire most particularly in nature, and also find extremely
useful in an artistic point of view. Its form is peculiarly eligible in
grouping, and its value increased from the fact, that it is cultivated
at the present time in such great varieties of shades and colours. I do
not know that I can experience a greater treat than to visit the
Botanical Gardens, Regent's Park, when their show of American plants is
on view; and I would recommend my pupils to devote some time to perfect
themselves in flowers that afford such great variety; and as instruction
as to the formation of one conveys the same for all, except as to
varying the colour, I do not feel that I could choose a more
advantageous specimen of floriculture for imitation.


LILAC RHODODENDRON.

_Danger._

    "All are for use--for health--for pleasure given:--
    All speak, in various ways, the bounteous hand of Heaven."
                                            CHARLOTTE SMITH.

Cut the petals in white wax; chose it rather thick, but not the double
wax. It is formed with two pieces, and yet when united it appears as if
there were five petals. The colour is produced in any shade of lilac by
mixing my bright crimson, middle blue, and a small portion of white
together. This is laid on round the edge upon both sides with a large
brush. When perfectly dry, the colour is partly taken off by passing a
moist brush containing very little colour over the whole. This carries
off the rough portion of the paint previously applied, and gives the
petals a soft and shaded appearance. Press the curling pin up the
centre of each point, and pinch against it so as to form a distinct
seam. Roll the head of the pin down each side of the seam, which will
occasion the edges of the petal to look a little crumpled. Unite the
petals neatly together, making a small plait between each. Form the
pistil of double wax: thicken it at the end to represent the stigma. The
stamina are produced by folding the end of a sheet of wax so as to
produce the same appearance as a hem in muslin, and cut ten fine
filaments for each flower (the hem represents the anthers). Colour the
pistil and stamina pale pink: darken the end of the pistil to a deep
crimson. Touch the ends of the stamina with a sable brush moistened with
brown (crimson powder, orange powder, and cake sepia); while wet, dip
them into farina (produced by mixing my lemon powder with white, quite
dry). Cut a piece of wire, three inches long, middle size: pass a small
piece of light green wax round the end, and double the wire down; then
attach the pistil to it, and place the stamina round, taking care that
the pistil rises above the stamina. The centre petal of each flower is
dotted with brown, the same colour previously used for the anthers. The
stem is passed through the centre of the corolla, pressing the edges of
the latter neatly to the wire. It is one of those flowers that has not a
calyx attached close to the flower, but is shaded lightly round the end
with a crimson brush. The flowers are mounted in clusters, varying in
number: seven form a pretty size. When the flowers are united, a cluster
of small points of very light green wax are placed: these are what are
termed by botanists, "calyx involucre," signifying that such calyx is
remote from the flower. Place three or four leaves round the stem, a
short distance from where the flowers are united.

Another of the American plants useful in grouping, is the


KALMIA.

(LATIFOLIA.) _Combination._

    "Ye flowers of beauty, pencilled by the hand of God!"
                                            POLLOK.

The corolla is in one piece, having five points. It requires to be cut
in thick wax. Press the finger in the centre, and pinch up each point,
bending the same towards the centre. A double piece of wax, cut in
points, is placed at the back; press the two firmly together, and make a
hole in the centre with the large pin. Paint in the corolla a small
circle of crimson points, using for this purpose a sable brush. Cover a
piece of fine wire two inches in length; mould to the end a small piece
of double green wax, making it quite round. The pistil is affixed to
this, and is formed by rolling the edge of the wax (as a whip in
muslin), and cutting it fine, as previously directed. The stamina are
prepared in the same manner, consisting of ten filaments, and are placed
round the pistil. Pass the stalk through the centre of the corolla,
rendering it secure by pressing the fingers close to the flower
underneath. Finish off the flower by attaching five minute points of
green wax. After the pistil and stamina are drawn through the flower,
press the anther of each filament down to the corolla with the head of
the pin, and tip them with deep crimson.


YELLOW JASMINE.

(JASMINUM REVOLUTUM.) _Grace and Elegance._

Cut the petals from double yellow wax. There are five to each flower.
Pass the head of the small curling pin quickly twice down each petal;
and indent it strongly down the narrow or tube part of each petal upon
the opposite side. Cover a piece of fine wire, about three inches long;
affix a small piece of green wax, pressed into a point by the side of,
and at the end of, the said points. Dip the latter into water, and
while wet, into the yellow powder, to represent farina. Place the five
petals around, pressing each on neatly and firmly, permitting the points
or stamina to be seen just rising from the neck or tube of the flower.
Pass a small piece of green wax round the lower end of the tube to form
the calyx. Some buds may be formed from wax, wound round wire, and made
solid; others of petals closed. About four flowers, and three or four
buds, form a pretty and useful cluster; but the number may be increased
or diminished at pleasure.


WHITE JASMINE.

(JASMINUM OFFICINALE.) _Amiableness._

The petals are prepared from thick or double white wax. It is put
together precisely as the last named flower; but the petals are pointed,
instead of being round, as in the yellow. Press the point of the curling
pin up the centre of each petal. After the flower is united, the tube is
tinged, first with pale yellow, and subsequently with red, very
slightly. The calyx consists of five fine points, which are cut in green
wax, and attached at the bottom of the tube. The flowers are mounted
like the yellow jasmine. The green sprigs are placed on two at once,
facing each other.


CAPE JASMINE.

(GARDENIA.) _Sweetness._

The petals are cut in thick wax, or single wax doubled; when the latter
is the case, be careful to place the two shining sides together. It is
particularly easy to form: the petals require to be curled precisely as
the yellow jasmine. The centre is formed by crushing two or three small
pieces of orange wax to the point of a wire. The first five small petals
are very faintly tinged with orange; this is merely to give warmth to
the centre of the flower, to make up for the deficiency of the
life-glow, if I may use this term--great care must therefore be taken
not to make it too dark. All the succeeding petals are placed on in rows
of five, turning some of the petals forward towards the centre of the
flower.

The neck of the flower is already formed from the ends of the petals; it
only requires to be moulded very smooth, and coloured a light pomona
green. The calyx consists of five points of green wax, placed at the end
of the tube. The dark foliage is placed round in clusters, and produces
a pleasing contrast to the flower. I would here observe, that this
flower is particularly useful in grouping. It is a greenhouse
production, and extremely fragrant in nature; it is consequently always
consistent to place it in a bouquet; independently of this, it is an
excellent substitute for white camellia in groups, where the last named
flower would be too large.

       *       *       *       *       *

I shall proceed to give some instruction in Roses. The varieties now
grown and named in our nurseries amount to the almost incredible number
of two thousand. I shall therefore choose, for the information and
improvement of those ladies who kindly think proper to place themselves
under the guidance of my little book, about six kinds, such as I deem
most useful, and as being different in form and colour. I think, when
these are perfectly understood, any other kind can be copied easily from
nature. I shall commence with the old favourite,


THE CABBAGE OR PROVENCE ROSE.

(ROSA CENTIFOLIA.) _Beauty._

    "The rose has one powerful virtue to boast
      Above all the flowers of the field--
    When its leaves are all dead, and fine colours are lost,
      Still how sweet a perfume it will yield."
                                            WATTS.

Cut the petals from pale pink wax; colour the three smallest rather deep
with the crimson powder. The split petals, marked on my pattern fifteen,
are coloured the same, but rather a lighter hue. Each succeeding set are
painted the same, but gradually diminish the colour until you arrive at
the outer petals, which are the lightest of all. To form the petals, use
a pin as little as possible; cupping them with the thumb or finger,
according to its size. For the largest petals, use the thumb, so
pressing each in the centre, while it is resting in the palm of the left
hand, as to become perfectly round. The last two or outer rows are
turned back with the head of a curling pin.

Prepare the foundation of solid wax, rolled round the end of a moderate
size wire. It must be cone-shaped. The three smallest petals are crushed
and placed at the point in a triangular form. The split petals, marked
on my pattern fifteen, are united into clusters of five, and placed
round immediately under the three that are crushed. Each succeeding row
of petals are placed on in like manner, taking care that each petal is
attached to the under part of the foundation, and not upon the side. I
particularly name this, as I too frequently find ladies err in forming
the roundness of the rose. The last two rows of petals, which are turned
back, must be placed rather lower than those preceding. The calyx is cut
from double light green wax.

The head of the curling pin is passed down the centre of each point
previously to their being placed on. Pass a strip of double green wax
close round the base of the flower, moulding it round and smooth with
the thumb and finger. This is to represent the seed cup. When the calyx
is affixed, it must rest against the back of the rose, and be so neatly
moulded over the seed cup, as not to show any division or seam.


THE MOSS ROSE.

_Beauty and Love._

Is similarly constructed (being one of the same class), but is rather
smaller. It requires the addition of a little real moss. It must be the
fine spray moss; and dried quickly, by placing a warm flat-iron upon it.
It is affixed to the calyx and seed cup by pressing it on with the head
of the curling pin.


THE WHITE ROSE.

(ROSE ALBA.) _Silence._

Cut the petals from thin white wax. Tinge the lower part of the first
three sets of petals with my lemon powder. Cup all the petals with the
finger, turning the last or largest two rows back. Cut a few stamina in
lemon wax, with the edge rolled to form the anthers; colour them with
orange, and when quite dry, touch them occasionally with brown (crimson
powder and cake sepia). These stamina are divided into clusters, eight
or ten filaments in each, and about five in number. Make a small
cone-shaped foundation; attach one cluster of stamina at the point. The
ten small petals are affixed round, turning in various directions, and
interspersed with the rest of the stamina. The whole of the remaining
petals are placed on five in a row, the last two turning back. Finish
off with calyx and seed cup, as in previous instruction. This rose is
peculiarly adapted for bridal bouquets; and I must here mention, while
alluding to the subject of bridal favours, that I made upwards of ten
thousand of these roses upon the happy occasion of Her Majesty's
marriage. It may afford some trivial amusement to my younger friends, to
relate the following anecdote, in connection with the event just alluded
to. About three years after Her Majesty was united to His Royal
Highness Prince Albert, a gentleman visited my establishment, and
inspected my specimens of flowers in wax with evident satisfaction. He
represented himself as being a great admirer of wax-work generally; and
stated, that he himself possessed a rare specimen, in fact, a perfect
_bijou_. He should wish me to see it. I, of course, expressed some
anxiety to behold such perfection of art; and accordingly, he sent his
footman with a small box, charged with strict orders to be particularly
careful in conveying the same. After removing sundry pieces of tissue
paper, and as many of wadding, my surprise may be easily imagined, when
I beheld one of the identical bouquets (white rose, orange blossom, and
myrtle, tied with white satin ribbon) that I had myself manufactured
upon the joyous occasion already alluded to. I am but human nature,
therefore, I hope I may be pardoned for expressing and feeling a certain
degree of vanity upon inspecting this Royal relic of my own hands;
still, I am not blind to the fact, that the happy occasion for which the
bouquet had been prepared, namely, the nuptials of our beloved
Sovereign, had materially enhanced its value to the possessor;--but I
will no longer digress from the leading feature of this work, but
commence the description of the formation of


THE DAMASK ROSE.

(ROSA DAMASCENA.) _Freshness of Complexion._

    "The rose, like ruddy youth, in beauty stands,
    And would be cropped by none but fairest hands."

Cut the petals from white wax, and paint them upon both sides (with my
crimson), two-thirds down. Cup the petals as in the preceding rose. Cut
two strips of stamina in lemon wax, tip them with my orange powder. Make
a foundation of lemon wax, and pass round the strips already mentioned.
Place in a triangular form the six small petals in clusters of two; the
next two sets are attached in like manner at the intermediate spaces,
the rest of the petals are placed on singly, five in each row, the
largest to turn back: finish off with seed cup and calyx as before
named. It is particularly necessary that the smallest or internal petals
should not be coloured too low down, as the white in the centre gives
great relief to the flower.


SWEET-SCENTED TEA ROSE.

(ROSA SAFRANO.) _Charming._

The petals of this rose require to be cut in thick white wax, coloured
three parts down with my lemon powder; shade lightly over this, but not
quite to the edge, with a little of my second yellow, and finish off by
a light tint of crimson (crimson lake in cake.) The petals are deep and
few, and require a great deal of cupping; to assist in producing this
rotundity of petal use the head of the ivory pin, commencing to roll
from the bottom to about half-way up the petal. Make a foundation of
white wax, rather large and cone-shaped; colour it the same as petals;
place the latter on singly, and press them forward to meet at the point
and conceal the foundation. They are placed on five in a row, and the
last two turned back: the seed cup is rather small; the calyx, and the
back petals are all deeply coloured with crimson. The stem is also very
red.


YELLOW ROSE.

(ROSA. CLOTH OF GOLD.) _Infidelity._

    "The rose is fragrant, but it fades in time."--DRYDEN.

Cut the petals from light lemon wax, colour them with deep yellow
towards the lower end, gradually shading off the same towards the upper
end of each petal. The first three sets of petals are placed on in
clusters of five, the others singly in rows of five. The foundation is
made similar to the damask rose, and the stamina show from the front of
the flower. Calyx and seed cup formed as usual.

[Illustration: J. Gardner & C{o}. Lith. 86 Hatton Garden.]


AUSTRIAN BRIAR ROSE.

(ROSA LUTEA.) _Mingled Pleasure and Pain._

This is a showy single flower, and very easily and quickly accomplished.
There are but five petals, cut from bright yellow wax; colour them
half-way down each with crimson: cup them a little in the palm of the
hand, not using a pin at all. The foundation is rather small, and formed
of green wax--one strip of stamina placed round, cut in lemon wax,
tipped with orange powder. Calyx and seed cup formed according to
previous instruction.

Having given as many roses as my space will admit of, and as will be
required for the purpose of initiating learners in this kind of flower,
I will turn the attention of my readers to another class, held in much
esteem, and which will afford a wide field of variety to copyists. I
allude to


THE CARNATION.

(DIANTHUS.) _Pure Love._

    "Yon bright carnation--once thy cheek
      Bent o'er it in the bud;
    And back it gives thy blushes meek
      In one rejoicing flood!"

This may be made in three varieties. The flakes are striped with broad
bands of colour, the bizarres are striped with three colours, and the
picotees have a narrow margin of streaks and spots; they are all
painted with a sable brush. To enable the wax to take the fine pencil
marks, moisture from the lips must be conveyed with the finger to the
petal. Make the strokes or bands broad near the edge of the petal, and
gradually diminish them to a fine point towards the lower end. The
petals are curled as follows:--press each in the palm of the left hand,
and roll the head of the pin twice or three times down the painted side
of the petal, taking care to do so between, and not upon the stripes.
Roll the pin once up the back of the petal, commencing from the bottom,
and not extending the same above half-way up. Cover the stem with green
wax, and place the petals on in rows of five. The calyx is cut from
double wax (light green); it is in one piece, with five points. It is
shaded rather dark green in the centre, and the points tipped with red
(very faint.) It is passed round the tube of the flower; at the base of
the same affix six small pieces of wax, as scales.

The leaf is long and narrow, cut from double wax, and a fine wire
covered and placed between to support it. To give it the natural bloom,
pass it through the prepared arrowroot. The leaves are placed on the
stem two and two, to face each other, and a small piece of lemon wax
passed round, to represent the joint that is always visible in this
flower.


MYRTLE.

(MYRTUS COMMUNIS.) _Love._

This flower is always admired in a bouquet from its light and pretty
appearance, and is in nature very fragrant. Cut the petals, five in
number, of double wax, indent the head of a curling pin in each; cut a
fringe at the end of a thin sheet of white wax, having previously folded
a very small piece down to form the anthers. Wind this strip or fringe
round the end of the finest wire, taking care to double the latter
down. Brush these filaments all out, and tip them at the points with my
lemon powder: place the five petals round. The calyx is a row of small
points cut in light green wax; the points are touched with a brush
containing a little brown, and then passed once round the flower. The
stalk is covered with a light green, but partially coloured with brown
also. The buds are made very round, of solid wax, and a calyx affixed to
them like the flower. To make the foliage, look at my instructions.
Commence mounting the flower at the top of a wire; four or six leaves
must be attached first, two and two, then the buds in like order, leaves
under each, and lastly the flowers. About four or six make a pretty
spray.


HONEYSUCKLE.

(CAPRIFOLIUM.) _Devoted Affection._

Colour eight or ten blossoms with second yellow, two or three are left
white, being all cut from wax devoid of colour; shade them with crimson
lake in cake; cut a piece of fine wire, two inches long, cut a strip of
white wax, three quarters of an inch in length, and pass it round one
end of the wire. This is to form the tube or foundation for the stamina
to be attached to: the latter are cut very fine from double lemon wax.
The anthers are tipped orange, the pistil green. Affix the pistil and
five stamina to each foundation, and then enclose it in the tube or long
part of the petals previously coloured, as also in the white blossoms,
first having passed a small head pin twice or thrice down each. The tube
is coloured dark crimson, gradually softened off towards the upper end
of the blossom. A calyx is attached at the base of the tube in the form
of a small cup--a piece of double green wax, cut very narrow, and passed
once round. The buds are made solid: cut the wax, which must be double,
in a triangular form; by so doing, and winding the broadest end round
the corresponding end of the wire, the proper form will be easily
accomplished, without much assistance from the fingers. Unite all the
buds together first, and then place the blossoms round. The leaves are
placed on two and two.


THE FUCHSIA;

(FULGENS;) _Good taste:_

Will afford a pleasing variety to the flowers already described. Its
blossoms hang pendant like a tassel; it is both graceful in form, and
brilliant in colour: its construction is simple, being formed from two
patterns only. The smallest is cut in single lemon wax, the largest in
double wax, the same colour. The four points of the largest pattern are
tipped with green, and shaded off with light scarlet towards the upper
part of the tube. It is not, however, entirely coloured until it is
made, as it is always difficult to unite a tube flower if it is painted
too close to the edge. The head of the curling pin is rolled up each
point upon the inside, and the tube formed with the handle of a brush,
joining the wax neatly upon one side. After it is united, it is again
painted with my scarlet powder and a small portion of the crimson.

The small or inner petals are coloured upon both sides with bright
crimson only. The head of a large curling pin is passed once down. The
stamina are cut from double lemon wax, a whip, as in muslin, being first
rolled to produce the anthers; these are touched with gum water, and,
while wet, dipped into cream colour powder, (produced by the combination
of my lemon and white.) The pistil is the same as the stamina, only that
it extends to a greater length: the stamina and pistil are shaded very
light scarlet. Cover a piece of fine wire, about four inches in length,
with light green wax, mould to the end a strip of lemon wax, to which
affix first the pistil and subsequently the stamina. Pass the wire
through the tube, and fix it firmly at the end; a narrow strip of double
light green wax placed once round the base of the tube completes the
whole. The buds are made solid, and formed similarly to the honeysuckle;
they are shaded green and scarlet, like the flower.


THE RED FUCHSIA;

(FUCHSIA,) _Taste:_

Is cut from white wax. It consists of four purple petals, and four
crimson; these are painted with the large brush upon both sides, leaving
a short space free from colour towards the base of each. Cut the pistil
and eight stamina as previously directed, and colour them with crimson.
To the end of these may be observed in nature small particles of farina,
this is produced (as in the former instruction of fuchsia fulgens), by
dipping them while moistened with gum water into dry powder. A
foundation is formed at the end of a piece of fine wire, the pistil
attached, and the stamina encircling the same. The four purple petals
are then placed on to form a square, having the head of the curling pin
previously rolled down each to cup them a little. The crimson or outer
petals are curled in like manner, and placed precisely at the corners
where the inner petals unite. The flower is now complete, with the
exception of the seed cup; but previous to this being placed on, (which
is merely a piece of green wax moulded into the shape of a small berry,)
the flower is coloured again crimson, softening it off towards the said
seed cup.


FORGET ME NOT.

_Forget me not._

    "The very name is Love's own poetry,
    Born of the heart, and of the eye begot,
    Nursed amid sighs and smiles of constancy,
    And ever breathing--'Love! forget me not.'"
                                            MILLER.

This little flower is cut in one piece from thick white wax. A hole is
pierced in the centre with the curling pin. The finest white wire is
used: affix a small piece of wax to the end, and fold it down with the
wire; it must be very minute. Pass it through the front of the flower,
and fasten it at the back by moulding it gently with the point of the
pin. It is painted after it is made: the centre is touched with a sable
brush--the colour, second yellow. The edges of the flower are coloured a
brilliant blue, for which use the light blue, with minute portions of
white and crimson. The buds and opening flowers are more pink than the
full-blown flowers.


PINK GERANIUM.

(PELARGONIUM.) _Preference._

Cut the petals in thick white wax; there are three narrow and two broad.
Mix a little white powder with some crimson, and paint all the petals
half way down lightly with this colour. The brush must contain but a
very small portion of colour, or it would dry rough. The broad petals
are afterwards coloured as follows:--first vein the lower ends with cake
smalt and crimson, using for the purpose a fine sable brush. Then take
a large brush, containing crimson alone, and form a large round spot,
gradually shading it off towards each edge. When thoroughly dry, apply
in the same manner the colour first used for veining, leaving a light
margin of the rose colour previously laid on. With a sable brush paint
some very faint pink veins, extending from the spot towards (but not
quite touching) the ends of the petals. Some dark veins are laid on the
spot also with crimson powder and cake sepia. The middle size wire is
necessary to support the flower. Commence its construction by affixing a
strip of white wax about an inch down the same; this is to represent the
pistillum. Five very fine points extend beyond the end of the wire,
these are previously snipped with the scissors; they are termed in
botany the stigma. At the base of the pistillum pass a strip of green
wax; this is the foundation to which the stamina and petals are to be
attached. The pistillum and stigma are painted entirely over with the
same colour previously used for veining. Cut five fine stamina in white
wax, to the points of each attach an anther, cut in deep orange wax.
They are placed across the end, and united by pressing them together
with the head of the curling pin. Curl the broad petals by laying the
painted side next the hand and pressing the thumb into its centre. Upon
the opposite side at the lower end of the petal indent and round it with
the point of the pin. The small petals are similarly curled, although it
is necessary to vary them a little according to taste; for upon
observing nature it will be found that there is no formality, in fact
scarcely two petals or two flowers are precisely the same upon a tree or
stem. Attach the stamina to the foundation, and then the two broad
petals; finally, the three narrowest are placed immediately under the
stamina. The calyx is cut from light green wax. The head of the pin is
to curl each previous to its being placed behind the petals. It is
shaded rather dark green towards the stem. Wash the calyx over with a
weak solution of gum water, and sprinkle it with down. In laying on the
latter do not touch it with the fingers, but throw it on from the
bottle, and shake off all that does not adhere.


SCARLET GERANIUM.

_Comforting._

The petals are cut from thick white wax. Colour them upon both sides
with bright scarlet (scarlet and crimson both in powders), form a very
small foundation of white wax to the end of a fine wire. Cut five fine
and short stamina, place them on the foundation, and colour them red.
Affix the five petals round, the two largest placed uppermost, the three
smaller ones under. Attach calyx as in the former flower. Cover the stem
neatly with light green wax, and mount the flowers in clusters. Make
some buds moulded in light green wax, others in white wax, painted
scarlet at the points; and the calyx placed round as in the flower.


MIGNONETTE.

(RESEDA ODORATA.) _Unconscious Beauty._

It is a singular circumstance that in this country this fragrant
production of nature is known by a French name, the translation of which
is the "little darling," while in Paris it is only known by its Latin
appellation, _reseda_, (herb, or dock cresses); but I believe I am
correct in stating that its seeds were first conveyed into England from
Paris. It is not particularly difficult to form, but requires extremely
good sight, and a light touch in its construction. It is of course made
without a paper pattern, and I would recommend a natural flower always
to be taken as a copy. It is also necessary to be very particular as to
the lemon tint used, the orange, and the shade of green, for if the
flower is formed correctly, it still looks unnatural if these points are
not materially considered.

Take a sheet of lemon wax, very thin and not too new; cut directly from
the corner six or eight fine filaments, as pointed as possible; roll
them into a small cluster. It requires two clusters of this size, and
two others nearly the same, but shorter. Fold the end of a piece of
lemon wax, and snip (very short) a few stamina, which appear, when
coloured, like seed. The colour required is a sort of pinky orange, if I
may be allowed to use such a term; for which purpose I employ my second
orange, white, and a minute portion of crimson powder: of course it
requires some judgment as to the several quantities. Commence the
formation by attaching a small piece of green wax to the end of a stem
made from white wire, mould it round according to nature; under this
place the cluster of orange seeds, on the top a small portion of lemon
wax, and at each corner the largest cluster of lemon stamina; the
smaller clusters place at the corners and under the orange seeds. The
calyx consists of five very narrow strips of green wax, placed neatly
and regularly at the back of the flower. Cover the stem with very light
green wax.


ORANGE BLOSSOM.

(CITRUS.) _Chastity._

This is cut in double white wax. It consists of five petals. The head of
the small curling pin is passed up and down over the whole of each; the
petals are afterwards curled a little with the fingers, to do away with
any formality. A middle size wire is used; pass a strip of white wax
round, about half an inch in length; press it broad at the end, and then
place a fringe of stamina twice round: colour the end of the pistil and
stamina with light orange. The petals are next affixed, and a cup or
calyx is formed at the base of light green wax. The buds are moulded
solid, round at the end, and pinched up into rather an irregular form
towards the base. The calyx is finished off the same as the flower.


SERINGA.

_Counterfeit._

    "The sweet seringa, yielding but in scent
    To the rich orange."

Cut the petals in white wax, double or thick; there are but four to form
the corolla. They are curled precisely like the orange blossom. The
centre is also similar to the last named, only that there is no pistil
or enlargement amongst the stamina. The calyx consists of four points of
double green wax, indented with the pin, and tipped brown. Each point is
placed at the back of each petal.


LILY.

(LILIUM CANDIDUM.) _Purity of heart._

    "Observe the rising lily's snowy grace."--THOMSON.

The lily is an advantageous flower in a large group. The one I am going
first to notice is peculiar for its purity of colour; it is very
ornamental in a garden, and is much revered in Catholic countries.
Painters frequently place it in the hands of the Virgin.

The petals, six in number, are cut from double white wax: the broad or
inner petals are curled as follows:--pass the head of the smallest
curling pin all over the petal to make it look slightly ribbed. Press
the pin firmly up the centre to make a distinct crease; turn the petal,
and press against the crease upon each side so as to form a groove.
Return to the former side, and again press the pin against the two
outside edges of the previously made creases; you will now have produced
two ribs or ridges. Pass the head of the pin round the edge of the
petal, to render it thin in appearance and to stretch the same. This
will also enable you to curl the petal into form with the fingers,
without splitting the edges. The outer or narrow petals are curled
similarly; but the slight difference there exists between the two will
be better understood by taking a real flower to model from. Cover a
piece of middle size wire with light green wax, to represent the
pistillum: enlarge it with the same at the upper end to represent the
stigma; press it into a triangular form, and indent it with the point of
the pin. Six stamina are placed round; they are each formed in the
following manner:--cover a piece of fine white wire with white wax, this
is a filament; attach to the end an anther, formed of bright orange wax,
indent it strongly across with the point of the pin. Wash it over with
gum water, and while it is in a state of moisture plunge it into the
orange coloured powder. The three largest petals are placed on first,
the three smaller or outer petals at the intervening spaces.


THE LILIUM LANCIFOLIUM.

_Generous heart._

The petals of this flower are curled similarly to the former, but they
bend back more in the form of a Turk's cap. There is a narrow strip of
bright yellow-green wax placed in the centre, and at the lower end of
each petal. The petals are painted light pink (crimson and white), and
covered with rich crimson spots. The roughness at the lower end of each
petal is produced by cutting small pieces of double white wax, and
pressing them on with the head of the pin. The pistillum and stamina are
also formed in the same manner as the _lilium candidum_, but vary in
colour. The filaments of the stamina are green, the anthers rich brown,
produced with crimson and cake sepia.


WHITE WATER-LILY.

(NYMPHEA ALBA.) _Eloquence._

    "Where will they stop, those breathing powers,
    The spirits of the new-born flowers?
    They wander with the breeze, they wind
    Where'er the streams a passage find."
                                            WORDSWORTH.

Commence the foundation of this flower by passing five strips of double
yellow wax round the end of a strong wire, indenting the edge of each
with the point of the curling pin, and pressing the same into a flat
surface: this foundation must be about three quarters of an inch in
diameter. Cut sixteen strips of very deep orange wax (double), about the
tenth of an inch in width: place them round at equal distances. Cut the
pattern No. 1, in double yellow wax. Roll the head of the curling pin in
the broad part, and bend the point of the same back. Place these on in
rows of eight, taking care that each row is between those preceding. The
petals are cut in thick white wax: cup them with the large head ivory
pin, to give them a rotundity of form; these are all placed on in rows
of four. Under the two or three largest sets it is essential to place a
small piece of white wire (covered with wax), to support each petal. The
four outside petals are green externally and white within; this is
accomplished by pressing a sheet of thin green wax against the thick
white. They are shaded brown up the centre upon the green side, using
for the purpose the large brush, slightly moistened with carmine and
sepia. The stem requires to be thickly covered with light green wax,
shaded with brown, similar to the back of the flower.


THE YELLOW WATER-LILY.

_Retirement._

Is much more simple to form. It consists of only five petals; these are
cut in double yellow wax; colour them rather lightly with green upon
both sides, from the centre towards the base of each. Curl the petals
with the head of the large pin until they become deeply cupped. The
centre is much smaller than that of the white lily--not exceeding in
diameter the third of an inch. The stamina are produced by cutting three
or four narrow strips of double yellow wax, and passing them round the
foundation; they must not extend above it, but when brushed out form a
full daisy-like centre. The five petals are attached to the back of
these, and the stem finished off as the last.


THE BLUE WATER-LILY;

_Warm affection;_

Forms a pleasing variety, but is not so generally well known, from the
fact of its requiring care in cultivation. Those previously described
may be seen blowing luxuriantly in common ponds; but this I am about to
give instruction upon I have never seen except in a hot-house.

Cut the petals in thick white wax; attach a fine white wire half-way up
the back of each. Colour them upon both sides with light blue, or more
properly speaking with blue lavender. It is a peculiar shade of colour
produced by mixing the light blue powder with white and a minute portion
of crimson. Curl the petals with the head of a large curling pin, by
passing it firmly once down each centre. The four outside petals are
green at the back, and shaded rather darker up the centre with the same
colour. The centre is formed similar to the white lily, but not so
large. The stamina are cut also in double yellow wax, and arranged
regularly round in rows of sixteen; three rows of these are sufficient.
The petals are placed on four in a row throughout the flower; the stem
is moderately thick and green.


DAHLIA.

(DAHLIA PURPUREA.) _Instability._

Cut the required number of petals from pink wax--colour them upon both
sides with crimson. When quite dry, wash them over lightly with bright
purple (using for the purpose a large brush, very moist.) When a second
colour requires to be laid on, I use a small portion of cake colour, (in
the present instance cake crimson, lake, with middle blue in powder.) To
curl the petals press the pin once down the centre, upon the shining
side; turn the petal, and press against the same at the point, forming a
melon-shaped section. Fold the edges of the petal to meet at the lower
end.

Make a foundation of two strips of double wax, taking care to double in
the wire. Indent it strongly with the pin towards the point, as it must
be pressed into a conical form: it must be one inch deep and as much in
circumference. Cut three strips of double wax, vandyke them with the
scissors, and indent each point with the pin, bend the whole forward,
and paint them in the same manner and colour as the petals. Pass these
strips round the foundation first, keeping them exactly the same height.
Place three rows of petals on, seven in number, then increase them to
nine in a row, and so continue until the flower is complete. Take care
to place every petal between and not behind its predecessors, and let
each row fall back, so that at the conclusion it has a globular
appearance in front, and flat at the back of the flower. Cut the calyx
in double wax; it consists of ten points, five are light green, attached
to the back of the flower, and five dark sepals which are pendant round
the stem.


THE SALVIA PATENS.

_Rich and Rare._

This flower is of so rich and lovely a hue, that for its colour alone it
deserves imitation. There are but few decidedly blue flowers, and I do
not myself know any one that approaches this for brilliancy; it is
however useful in consequence of its form being light and spray-like.
The petals require to be cut in double blue wax; the shape must be
produced previously to the colour being laid on. Petals cut from pattern
No. 1, are much rolled with the pin and neatly united up the back. Take
a piece of middle size wire, with a small piece of wax secured at the
end, and pass it through the opening of the tube just formed. The under
or banner petal is formed by pressing it in the palm of the hand; turn
up the edges of the broad end of the petal, and turn down the edges of
the narrow part; at the same time I must mention that a small wire is
placed between this petal, by which it is affixed to its position. The
buds are formed in the same manner as the flower, with the exception of
the banner petal. The calyx consists of two points or sepals, attached
one under and the other opposite the tube. The whole is painted with
deep rich blue, produced by mixing cake smalt with the middle blue in
powder. They are mounted in a spray by placing buds and flowers down the
stem, two facing each other, and arranged alternate ways. A green leaf
is placed under each bud and blossom.


VARIEGATED CAMELLIA.

_Unpretending excellence._

    "In eastern lands they talk of flowers,
    And they tell in a garland their loves and cares;
    Each blossom that blooms in their garden bowers,
    On its leaves a mystic language bears."
                                            J. G. PERCIVAL.

As the limits of this little work will not admit of my giving
instruction in more than one of these favourite flowers, I select the
variegated one, considering it the most difficult.

The petals require to be cut in thick wax; colour them upon both sides
with bright crimson, leaving white circular spots indiscriminately in
various parts of two petals out of every five. The largest petals are
formed by pressing the thumb very firmly upon the shining side, taking
care that the edge inclines back without any wrinkled appearance. A
crease is made up the centre upon the opposite side. Each set of petals
are painted and curled the same, but the smallest are folded together.
The stamina must be prepared from pale lemon wax, (cut double,) and the
anthers at the end tipped with orange powder to represent the farina;
they are cut into small clusters of seven or eight. Use the large
wire,--pass a piece of double wax, the width of a sheet, and half an
inch in depth, round the wire,--about half an inch deep; bend the wire
down, and mould the whole into a cone shape. Affix a small cluster of
stamina to the point, and in various directions the five smallest
petals; insert among these two or three clusters of the stamina. Place
in rows of five each succeeding set of petals, taking care in each row
to introduce about two of the variegated or spotted petals, allowing
such to be principally upon one side of the flower (and this may be
observed in nearly all flowers that are variegated.)

The calyx is cut from lemon wax, shaded green and also brown. The head
of the pin is rolled upon each to cup it: they are placed immediately
behind the flower in rows of three, each succeeding set in the
intervening spaces.

The stem is covered with a strip of light green wax, moulded smooth with
the thumb and finger, tinged brown with the brush.


THE PASSION FLOWER;

_Belief:_

    "Has become strangely interwoven with our faith, from a fancied
    resemblance to a cross and a crown, although it requires a great
    effort of the imagination to call up either the one or the other.
    Still its very name in some measure renders it sacred to faith and
    belief."

Cut the petals, ten in number, from treble wax, one of white and two of
lemon; colour the lemon side with light green, leaving the edge rather
lighter. Curl each petal in the following manner: press it in the hand,
while warm, that the three thicknesses of wax may be certain to adhere.
Roll the head of the small pin once down the centre upon the white side,
and round the edge also. This must be done lightly at first, for if a
pin is pressed too heavily it occasions the sheets of wax to separate
and have a blistered appearance. Cut three triangular pieces of double
wax, one inch in length, place the broad end to a piece of fine wire,
and mould them smoothly down, small at the base and broad at the point;
these three are affixed to the end of a middle size wire, and painted
purple after they are attached. A piece of light green wax is moulded
round immediately under them; about a quarter of an inch from this is
attached the stamina, cut in light green wax, and touched round the
ladle shape end with my orange powder. A full inch from this is placed a
small foundation, formed of strips of green wax, two of which are
snipped and coloured purple. The rays are attached immediately
afterwards, and are manufactured as follows:--cut a number of strips of
white wax, roll them between the fingers to incline them to be round;
place your pieces of marble in warm water, and finish rolling the said
strips of wax or rays between them: this is a much quicker, easier, and
cleaner process than by doing them entirely with the fingers. Cut a
strip of double green wax to pattern, place it about three quarters of
an inch from the edge of a folded paper, place each of the rays closely
upon this, taking care that every point extends only to the paper; this
method will enable you to place them perfectly even, which is very
necessary. For a flower it requires two strips of these rays; they are
painted blue at the point and purple at the base, leaving a
corresponding space white between the two colours. Press the two strips
neatly round the previously made foundation, bending them back and
regulating them with the point of the curling-pin. I next attach five
petals at equal distance, the longest and narrowest of the two sets are
placed on first, the other five immediately between. The calyx is cut in
light green wax, it consists of three sepals, which are rolled with the
head of the pin and attached to the back of the flower.


LEMON HOLLYHOCK.

_Persuasion._

This flower should be constructed of very thin lemon wax. It requires
thirty small petals and seven large for a full blown flower: each petal
is shaded with the light yellow powder towards the lower end. Crimp each
petal with the point of the curling pin, and fold one end forward, the
other back. Pass a strip of double lemon wax round the end of a piece of
middle size wire, and mould the same to a point; the thirty small petals
are attached first, so as to form a full rosette. The large petals are
affixed to the back, and finished off with the calyx of double green.
Half blown flowers are formed the same, but cut from smaller patterns.
The early buds are moulded solid of green wax, covered with lemon; the
calyx is placed on similar to the flower, moistened with gum water and
sprinkled with down. Pink hollyhocks may be made precisely the same, the
only difference being that pink wax and colour must be substituted for
lemon.


THE CACTUS.

_Warmth._

Cut the petals in bright orange wax, place a fine white wire half way up
each, and occasion it to adhere by attaching a strip of orange wax over
it. Colour them upon both sides with carmine. Curl the petals by passing
the head of the pin twice or thrice from each edge towards the centre,
and bend the same back. Fold down the edge or end of two sheets of thick
white wax. Leave a quarter of an inch from the end quite white, then
paint a pink stripe half an inch deep; leave again a quarter of an inch
white, and finally finish with a stripe of green. Cut the whole two
widths into a deep fringe to form the stamina, and colour the anthers
(produced by the fold) with cream colour (white and lemon powders). Take
a piece of middle size wire, pass round it a strip of white wax; this is
to form the pistillum. Attach to the end five fine points of white wax,
and paint them also cream colour; shade the filament of the pistillum
red. Divide the stamina, attach half to the upper, and the remainder to
the three under petals. Join the pistillum to a strong stem, passing
white wax round to form a foundation. Affix to the foundation the six
petals, to which are attached the stamina, letting the latter fall from
the top petals over the lower ones, and dividing it so as to enable the
pistillum to pass through. Every set of petals are placed precisely
between those preceding until the flower is complete. It must be
remembered that the largest petals are attached first, and that they
gradually decrease until you arrive at the smallest.

    "For not, oh, not alone to charm our sight,
    Gave God your blooming forms, your leaves of light."
                                            CHARLES SWAIN.


GROUPING FLOWERS.

One of the principle rules to be observed is to avoid placing those
flowers together which approach the same form or colour. Thus, in
arranging two round flowers, I invariably break the formality by
introducing some light spray. To facilitate a taste for grouping is the
cause of my introducing illustrations to this work. It will be observed
that I arrange spring flowers always alone. I am not so particular with
the flowers of every season, for art in cultivation has done so much in
furnishing us with specimens of various seasons, that it is no uncommon
thing to meet with a rose in spring that we should take for

    "The last rose of summer."

In the florists' windows, in winter (I mean in Covent Garden), we may
perceive such perfections of nature that our imagination might be
tempted to suppose that the summer sun could alone have produced them.

I would recommend the early spring flowers to be arranged in flower pots
or in wicker baskets. In mixed groups, as a certain guide to those who
do not like to trust to their own taste for blending colours, I would
place lavender near pink; blue to red; white should approximate to
scarlet, and yellow to purple. The small flowers particularly essential
in separating the larger ones are white and yellow jasmine, nemophila
cineraria, verbenas, myrtle, honeysuckle, etc., etc. The pendent flowers
give great ease and elegance to a bouquet, and should be placed in
first. The neck of the vase should be well filled with dried moss, which
can be procured at the herbalists. Alabaster and glass vases are best
adapted for the reception of wax bouquets, except when they are intended
for the centre of a table, and then I prefer baskets of alabaster,
wicker, or gilt; glass shades are requisite to cover either. All, or any
of the last-named articles, I shall be happy to furnish to those who may
kindly think proper to favour me with orders, addressed to my residence,
35, Rathbone Place.


WAX FLOWERS, AS ORNAMENTS FOR THE HAIR,

Have become so generally worn at Her Majesty's balls and drawing-rooms,
that I deem it expedient to give some particular instructions
respecting them, so as to insure their durability and prevent their
adhesion to the hair.

For the first point named, I attach a fine white wire half way up the
back of each petal; this materially strengthens the flower. All white
flowers should be sprinkled with my prepared arrowroot, this prevents
the edges of the petals clinging to the hair, and is a protection
against heat. In coloured flowers, the paint has the same effect. The
stems are to be covered with narrow ribbon, green or brown (China
ribbon). When the flowers are to be perfumed, the perfume is to be
placed upon the ribbon.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR MODELLING FOLIAGE.

There are various ways of modelling leaves, but I would recommend them
to be made of sheet wax as much as possible. Take three sheets of green
wax, matching in colour the leaf you are about to imitate. It is not
material whether the middle sheet is the same colour as the upper or
under sheet. Cover a wire,--the size must be chosen according to the
proportion of the leaf,--place the said wire when covered under one
sheet--cut the wax into the form of the leaf required. Plunge the real
leaf into cold water, and the wax into hot; while in a softened state
press it firmly and quickly upon the wrong side of the real leaf. This
will give a truthful imitation. If a real leaf cannot be obtained of any
particular flower, they can be modelled from a plaister mould, which I
shall be happy to furnish.

Another method is to melt a small quantity of green wax into a liquid
state. With a broad flat brush wash over the wrong side of a real leaf,
previously oiled with the best salad oil.

The latter method may be also adopted upon a mould, soaked in warm water
ten minutes previous to its being used.

The stalk must be attached afterwards, and a second layer of wax placed
over.


THE VICTORIA REGIA.

    "There is a splendour in the living flower."

Cut the petals from my peculiarly prepared wax; attach a wire half way
up each at the back; colour the first sixteen petals with pale lemon.
The remaining petals require a faint glow of pink laid on from the base
towards the centre. They must be all much moulded with the large ivory
curling pin, as well as assisted by the thumb and finger. The sixteen
petals which constitute the two first rows, and which have been tinted
pale lemon, have a deep pink vandyke or point formed at the lower end of
each; round the edge of this point must be laid numerous spots and
strokes of rich crimson, produced with crimson lake and minute portions
of blue. Eight of the last named petals are shaded darker than the
others, and are placed on first.

The centre or foundation is formed by moulding wax into a solid
substance, two inches in diameter and three-quarters of an inch in
depth. The stamina are very numerous, and cut according to patterns. The
points are crimson, then shaded lemon, and rich pink the lower end. They
are curled by passing the head of the curling pin firmly down the
centre, bending the points a little back. The first four rows should
fall down over the foundation, the other stand erect; by this means a
direct crown is formed which contributes in a great measure to the
beauty of the flower. The petals are placed on in rows of eight, with
the exception of the last four, or as they may be termed, sepals of the
calyx. These are at the back or outside dark chocolate colour (I prepare
a wax on purpose). The large green seed cup that is finally attached is
cast in hot wax, and can be purchased either at my establishment, or at
my counters, Soho Bazaar. The calyx and seed cup are covered with
prickles: to form these, roll some shreds or strips of light green wax
between the marbles moderately warm; sever them into small pieces; hold
the thickest end to a lighted candle, and apply each quickly to its
proper place.

In selecting this flower as the closing subject of my instructions, it
may not be entirely devoid of interest to many of my pupils to be
furnished with a brief detail of the derivation of its name and
character, as also the place where this extraordinary production of
nature was first discovered. Sir R. Schomburgk was travelling in British
Guiana, in the year 1837. It was in the River Berbice he beheld it, or I
may say them, for numbers were floating in all their pride and glorious
beauty, and at once struck him with surprise from the majesty of their
form, and brilliancy of colour. This plant flowered first in England, at
Chatsworth, the seat of the Duke of Devonshire, and soon after was named
"Victoria," by the gracious permission of her Majesty.

Mr. Paxton has publicly stated, that his design for the Crystal Palace
originated in consequence of his having planned the house in which was
grown the first specimen of this gigantic plant at Chatsworth. Thus its
name will be immortalized in connexion with that of the Exhibition till
time immemorial. I think it may be justly denominated an emblem of
strength and power.

Before I entirely leave this subject, I cannot resist alluding to the
circumstance of my withdrawing works of great magnitude (and which I had
purposely prepared for competition), from the late great Exhibition. It
is due also to the gentlemen who formed the executive committee that a
true statement should be made respecting their exclusion. A rumour
having been circulated that they (the gentlemen of the executive
committee), refused to give me adequate space, I am anxious to repudiate
such statements, and to acknowledge that some of my best patronesses
previously to the opening of the Great Exhibition, and since that
period, have been various members of the families of those gentlemen and
the Royal commissioners. Ample space was allotted to me in the gallery,
and it was considered that as other wax flowers were to be arranged
there, mine would not suffer more than the rest; but the gentleman, and
I believe the only person who had anything to do with the arrangement of
mine, was Mr. Owen Jones. I acquit this gentleman of any invidious
feeling towards me, but can only regret that he did not personally
inspect my works. If he had, I feel persuaded he would have been amazed
at their magnitude and the bulk of labour executed by myself unassisted.
As it is, it is more than probable that I suffer in the opinion of some,
to the effect that I showed some degree of "temper" or obstinacy in
withdrawing them.

I am likewise anxious that it should be known that it was not the heat
of the gallery entirely that intimidated me. My plates of bent glass
were much larger than any in the Crystal Palace, and the groups were
arranged upon thirty hundred weight of stone. The whole formed such a
huge mass that it was deemed by scientific men to be impracticable to be
elevated to the gallery, without jeopardising what had been produced by
me by intense labour and profuse expense. The truth of this statement
can be testified by an examination of the works, which may be viewed
daily at my residence from ten till five o'clock (gratuitously). They
have already been inspected by _fifty thousand_ visitors; and as a proof
that they have excited some interest and much admiration, I subjoin at
the end of this little volume a few extracts from the public journals.


I have but little more to add--

    "Now to the world my little book go forth,
      With all thy faults."

I cannot expect it will escape the criticism and censure of some; but if
it meet the approbation of the discerning, and carries out my cherished,
my promised views, that of instructing the uninitiated--furthering the
purposes of Wax Flower Modelling--and refreshing the memories of my
earliest pupils, who may for a season have neglected so charming an
occupation, I shall be more than repaid for the trials and
disappointments attending the various efforts I have made to satisfy
all.

    "Hoping the best--ready the worst to brook,
    Yet seeking friendly hearts--go forth, my little book."

"As life is then so short, we should so live and labour that we may have
pleasing remembrances to console and cheer us at its close; let us work
earnestly and diligently, not only for our own good, but for that of our
fellow creatures:--

    "Oh! let us live so, that flower by flower,
    Shutting in turn, may leave
    A lingerer still, for the sunset hour,
    A charm for the shaded eve!"
                                  HEMANS.




 EXHIBITION OF
 WAX FRUITS AND FLOWERS,
 BY MRS. PEACHEY,
 ARTISTE TO HER MAJESTY.


The following eloquent awards of the press are placed as nearly as
possible in the order of their respective dates, but the dates are
necessarily omitted.

    Mrs. Peachey, artiste to her Majesty, has now on private view at her
    rooms, 35, Rathbone Place, a superb collection of works intended for
    the Great Exhibition. They consist principally of an enormous
    bouquet of flowers and a colossal vase of fruit, both of which have
    been executed upon a scale never previously attempted in this
    country. The flowers are so arranged, that they appear to stand in a
    basket suspended over the surface of a pool of limpid water, in
    which the _Victoria Regia_ and other similar plants are already
    floating. Nothing can be more exquisite or artistic in effect than
    the manner in which the various flowers are grouped. The bouquet
    comprises specimens of almost every flower known to the botanist,
    from the simple honeysuckle of the cottage garden, to the rarest and
    most valuable exotics of the East.

    Some idea of the dimensions of the two principal works may be
    gathered from the fact, that the shades are nearly six feet high,
    the largest ever blown in England, and the flowers occupied nearly a
    year in modelling. It was the intention of Mrs. Peachey to forward
    these beautiful specimens of her skill to the Great Exhibition,
    where a prominent place on the ground-floor was assigned to them;
    but it appears, that, owing to subsequent arrangements, another
    space, in one of the galleries, was allotted to her, and not at all
    adapted to such costly and fragile productions. The heat of the sun,
    in such an exposed situation, would have damaged the flowers
    irreparably; and even if this objection did not exist, it would be
    impossible to have the enormous shades, with their delicate
    contents, raised by any machinery at command into the desired
    position. The exhibition is one of so novel and beautiful a
    character, that it will well repay a visit.--_Morning Post._

       *       *       *       *       *

    The art of making flowers in wax has been brought to a very high
    degree of perfection by Mrs. Peachey, Her Majesty's artiste. There
    is not a floral production that she cannot truthfully and delicately
    reproduce with her kindly material, and she has lately executed a
    work which we believe defies competition in the department to which
    it belongs. This is an enormous bouquet, containing flowers of the
    most intricate structure, and supported by a rock, which peers from
    a lake of the brightest looking glass, decorated in its turn with
    waxen aquatic plants. All the flowers were modelled in the first
    instance from white wax, and the beautiful colours are all produced
    by painting. The whole group is enclosed by a shade, composed of
    four glass plates, so curved as to meet at the top.

    The work in question is to be seen in Rathbone Place, but it was the
    intention of Mrs. Peachey that it should be seen at the Crystal
    Palace. According to her statement, she was led to believe that she
    would be allowed a ground-floor situation, but was only allowed a
    place in the gallery, so exposed to the sun, that the first hot day
    would have performed a work precisely the reverse of her own
    labours. Under these circumstances she has deemed it better that her
    flowers should blush unseen, than that they should melt away in a
    halo of visibility.

    Into the Crystal controversy it is not our desire to enter, but we
    would testify to the excellence of Mrs. Peachey's work as being
    perfect of its kind.--_The Times._

       *       *       *       *       *

    We yesterday inspected a beautiful collection of wax flowers by Mrs.
    Peachey, artiste to Her Majesty, now on private view at 35, Rathbone
    Place. We have seen many specimens of the elegant art of modelling
    in wax, but without exaggeration we may declare that more
    magnificent and truthful imitations of nature it has never been our
    lot to witness. The centre-piece is an immense bouquet of several
    hundred flowers, of almost every description, and every hue, from
    the gorgeous scarlet cactus to the virgin-tinted snowdrop, modelled
    with the closest fidelity, and arranged with exquisite taste. At the
    foot are models of the glorious water-lily of Guyana, the recently
    discovered Victoria Regia, in several stages of its development,
    from the close shut bud with its prickly calyx to the expanded
    flower. Some idea of the dimensions of this giant bouquet may be
    formed from the fact that it stands nearly six feet in height, and
    that the bent plate-glass shade with which it is covered alone cost
    £200.

    Next to this in beauty as well as size is a vast group of fruit,
    fifty inches in height, the shade to which is itself a curiosity,
    being we believe, the largest for superficial dimensions ever yet
    blown in England. Besides, there are a number of smaller groups of
    flowers and fruit, all of singular beauty. We understand that Mrs.
    Peachey intended this collection for exhibition at the Crystal
    Palace; but, owing to some miscomprehension on the part of the
    commission, they have been reserved for private view. The place
    assigned to Mrs. Peachey was, we are informed, in one of the
    galleries, so close to the roof as to render the solar heat too
    dangerous for the extremely susceptible material of which these
    articles are composed.--_Morning Advertiser._

       *       *       *       *       *

    Mrs. Peachey, the artiste to her Majesty, has on view at her
    residence, 35, Rathbone Place, some new examples of her
    extraordinary skill in wax painting, originally intended for the
    Exhibition, but not permitted to appear there in consequence of the
    _locale_ assigned to them being at the top of the building, where,
    exposed to the action of the sun, they would be in peril of
    dissolution. The examples consist of two remarkable models--one an
    enormous and magnificent bouquet, consisting of hundreds of flowers
    of the most intricate structure and beautiful colouring, as well as
    the greatest diversity of character. The violet and the _Cactus
    grandiflora_, with the water-lily of Guiana, and the newly
    discovered _Victoria regia_, form part of this exquisite group.

    All the flowers were modelled separately from white wax, and the
    colours afterwards superinduced. The bouquet stands six feet in
    height, and is covered with a bent glass shade. The other model is a
    group of fruitage, covered with a glass shade more than four feet
    high, and nearly three feet across, being the largest ever yet blown
    in England. It was manufactured from designs supplied by Mrs.
    Peachey herself, and cost £200. Nothing can be more picturesque or
    artistic than these models: full of wonderful detail which it is
    impossible to pursue, and implying a marvellous amount of labour and
    ingenuity, they lead us to regret that any misunderstanding should
    have led to their absence from the Crystal Palace.--_Illustrated
    London News._

       *       *       *       *       *

    Ever willing to extend our protecting ægis to the weak and
    unsupported, we feel ourselves called upon at the present juncture
    to step into the arena as the defenders of several meritorious
    individuals whom we conceive to have met with the most unworthy
    treatment in regard to the exhibition, or rather the non-exhibition
    of their productions of art in the Crystal Palace. We have received
    a number of communications from artists of first-rate talent,
    complaining of the exercise of undue influence in official quarters,
    but we have been more immediately led into an investigation of the
    circumstances connected therewith, by a communication from Mrs.
    Peachey, of No. 35, Rathbone Place, Oxford Street, artiste in wax to
    Her Majesty. That lady's statement is nearly as follows:--that about
    twelve months ago, when the erection of the building in Hyde Park
    was spoken of, and the nature of its contents mentioned, she,
    feeling anxious to prove to the world that the very high and royal
    patronage she enjoyed was not unmerited, sent in her subscription of
    five guineas towards the construction of the building, and intimated
    her intention of sending in some specimens of her own works. She
    was immediately assigned a most elegant site for her display on the
    ground floor, in the avenue near the fountain.

    Nothing could be more consonant to her wishes, and she forthwith
    sent in her pedestals and minor portions of framework, etc. Some
    time since, however, on questioning this gentleman as to the
    certainty of her getting the desired position, she was astonished at
    being told she must send her articles to No. 29, _in the gallery_.
    This she refused to do, and the consequence has been that the
    Exhibition has been deprived of some of its rarest specimens of art.
    The reason Mrs. Peachey assigns for not sending her works to the
    gallery is the impracticability of their being carried up stairs
    without being, from their extreme fragility, seriously injured,
    perhaps mutilated. Even were they to be slung up by tackle, she says
    they would be subject to the same risk, and her two principal works,
    viz.--an enormous bouquet of the most exquisitely modelled flowers,
    and a gigantic vase of fruit, she values at no less a sum than
    £1000.--_Sunday Times._

       *       *       *       *       *

    A visit to Rathbone-place, is a stepping from the ordinary
    exhibitions of mere art to a miniature garden, in which may be seen
    grouped together the beautiful flowers and fruits of every season
    and every clime. We shall not attempt to describe with too nice
    minuteness the wonderful creations of this gifted lady's hand, but
    freely give our impressions as they came on our inspection of these
    completions--these perfections of art.

    To name all the blushing subjects so fairly representing the rich
    and wide domain of Flora, would be far less easy of accomplishment,
    of enumeration, than to say that queen roses--the English rose--the
    delicate, the beautifully clothed lily--the crimson fuchsia--the
    acacia, and gorgeous tulip--the Victoria Regia, in all its stages of
    development, bud, blossom, flower,--were as the realities of stilly
    life, which seemed to say, in the expressive language of
    flowers--"put aside from us our glassy veils, remove our crystal
    shrines, that we may nod kisses to the wooing zephyrs."

    Pomona, too, was there. Her thousand fruits clustered under
    transparent concaves. Grapes that might have moved Bacchus to press
    them with his rosy lips--peaches, melons, shiny currants, inviting
    strawberries, and crowning pineapples--all worthy the pencil of a
    Lance--glorious as the painting of nature, mockingly tempted us to
    seize the fairy prizes--reminding us of an anecdote of Swift. The
    facetious dean, with several friends, was invited to walk the
    rounds, and admire the delicious fruit bending the countless trees
    to the earth in the orchard of an "old acquaintance," who kindly
    pointed out to his most admiring guests the charming sweets by which
    they were surrounded; but, "sour grapes to them"--asked them not to
    make themselves "at home," nor offered pear nor apple. This was too
    much for Swift, who had a happy knack of inventing scraps of poetry
    to suit his purposes, and thus applied himself on the occasion; "I
    remember that my old grandmother had a saying:--

        "Always take a peach
        When within your reach."

    Action suited to the words quickly followed. The quick arch wit of
    St. Patrick's put forth his hand, and his good example was followed
    by all the company, who each took a peach, when within his reach.
    Now, we must confess that we were almost tempted to essay a similar
    feat of onslaught on Mrs. Peachey's magic garden, but were,
    fortunately for all future sight-seers, withheld by the
    consciousness that those many rainbow liveried sweets to the eye,
    were not for ourselves or Covent-garden, but were the triumphs of a
    skilful artiste.

    And are these the works that have been, which are refused a fitting
    place in the high field of universal, peaceful rivalry and
    competition in the Crystal Palace for the works _of all nations_?
    What! Can this be possible? Here are the works _of our own nation
    not there_--excluded! Surely for the credit of the Exhibition--for
    the honorable name of the Executive Committee, there should be
    enquiry. The works cannot be said to be excluded upon their merits,
    for they have not been inspected by the authorities. There was, nay,
    there is room enough in the building in Hyde Park for this peerless
    and costly challenge of an English woman as an artiste. England in
    fair competition against the world! We looked for these gems of art
    in the Crystal Hall--but found them only in the catalogue! We asked
    where they were, and the nymph Echo answered "where!" If there be
    any unworthy motive for this, to us, incomprehensible exclusion of
    native art, let such be dissipated by the breath of public opinion.
    But we would fain persuade ourselves that there must be some
    misapprehension. The works of a lady--patronized by the Queen, to be
    excluded from an Exhibition open to the people of all nations--we
    cannot comprehend it; but for the honour and fame of the nation,
    hope to see in their proper places, works daily visited, and admired
    by the aristocracies of rank, wealth, and refined taste.

    Mrs. Peachey has spared neither pains nor expense, the glass
    flower-shade having cost her £200; she has contributed to the
    Exhibition, and exhibits freely. The press has noticed the
    emanations of her genius, and we add our testimony.--_West Kent
    Guardian._

       *       *       *       *       *

    And before passing from the wax flower group, we may add an
    expression of our regret, that differences of some kind prevented
    its including the very magnificent case and bouquet which had been
    prepared by Mrs. Peachey, one of the artistes in wax to her Majesty.
    The stand itself, which, with its contents, was on private view, is
    externally, more elegant than any of the cases in the Exhibition,
    and the flowers would have yielded to none in variety or brilliancy
    of tint. The reputation of Mrs. Peachey, whose artistic talent is
    of a first-rate description, would have justified the authorities in
    some concession, and would have enriched this department of the
    Exhibition with a feature of no ordinary beauty.--_Illustrated
    London News._

       *       *       *       *       *

    We have inspected, at the private residence of Mrs. Peachey (in
    Rathbone Place, Oxford Street,) artiste in wax-work to Her Majesty,
    one of the most remarkable specimens of ingenuity and industry which
    London at present contains. This is an immense bouquet of wax
    flowers which that lady had prepared for the Crystal Palace, but
    which are not at present within its walls, for a reason to which we
    will presently advert. Let us first describe this really magnificent
    work. On four sturdy stone columns, tastefully designed, and edged
    with gold, is a looking-glass platform upwards of four-feet square,
    and representing water. From the centre of this fairy lake rises a
    glass column supporting a golden basket. In this is placed a bouquet
    some two feet high, and of proportionate girth, in which are
    clustered all the flowers we ever saw, and a great many which we
    never saw--from the humble favorites of our _Rigolettes_ and _Fleur
    de Maries_, up to the floral aristocracy of the conservatory. There
    they are exquisitely reproduced in all their graces of form and
    colour, and arranged with the attention to contrast and general
    effect which bespeaks the superintending eye of the real artist. We
    are afraid to say how many hundred wax flowers compose this splendid
    bouquet; but we can safely say that, after having walked round and
    round it, and, as we thought, having completely examined it, the eye
    continually insisted on detecting some new variety, and we finally
    abandoned the hope of ever becoming acquainted with the whole. From
    the corners of the imitative waters rise various superb specimens of
    water plants, fresh, cool, opaque-looking, productions; and at the
    foot of the glass column, as if planted by accident, spring a few of
    our more common and very beautiful garden flowers. The whole is
    covered by an enormous bent glass shade, from the centre of which
    rises a pretty copy of Her Majesty's crown. Nothing can be more
    beautiful or in better taste than the object we have described. Near
    it is another vase, not so large, and filled with wax fruit of every
    kind--the bloom of the grape, the blush of the apple, the rich brown
    of the nut, the velvet of the apricot, the glow of the orange, and
    the characteristics of a hundred other fruits being represented with
    a tantalizing fidelity. We would have flogged the fellow who broke
    the Portland Vase, but we did not feel so sure, while gazing upon
    these admirable imitations of the most delicious fruits, that we
    should have been so severe upon some earnest gourmand who might dash
    down the vase of which we speak, in wrath that his eye and his
    palate had been so nobly cheated. The two vases, one of flowers, the
    other of fruits, are certainly the most sumptuous specimens of wax
    composition we ever saw.

    As we have said, these works were intended by Her Majesty's artiste
    for the Great Exhibition. On her applying for a site, that lady
    states that a very admirable one was assigned her upon the
    ground-floor of the building, near the fountains. Upon her work
    being complete, she was directed to place it in the gallery. This,
    Mrs. Peachey considered would be to jeopardise it, from the danger
    so fragile a production would probably sustain in being taken up
    stairs, and still more from the heat of the sun, to which the wax
    would in that situation be exposed, and which would speedily produce
    Icarian results destructive to the work.--_Bell's Weekly Messenger._

       *       *       *       *       *

    Two groups of flowers and fruit most tastefully and elaborately
    executed in wax by Mrs. Peachey, of Rathbone Place, have, we regret
    to say, been withdrawn from the Crystal Palace in consequence of an
    inappropriate position having been assigned them by the Committee.
    Mrs. Peachey, who stands unrivalled in this class of ornamental art,
    feeling herself aggrieved by the decision of the committee, has
    appealed from it to the judgment of the public, and with that view
    has placed her works in an apartment of her residence, 35, Rathbone
    Place, for inspection. The taste, the labour, the time bestowed on
    these magnificent works, must have been very great, and we fancy the
    visitors to the Crystal Palace will be greater losers by their
    absence from that repository than even the fair artiste herself, for
    they are deemed by all who have seen them the finest works of the
    kind ever executed.--_Morning Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *

    We have several times during the past week inspected, with much
    gratification a magnificent bouquet of the most rare exotics, as
    also a large collection of grouped fruits, modelled entirely in wax,
    by Mrs. Peachey, Her Majesty's artiste in ordinary in that
    department of feminine accomplishment, and intended by that lady for
    competition in "the World's Fair." We have often had occasion to
    witness the extraordinary skill displayed by this lady in imitating
    the beauties of nature from her kindly materials, but we must
    confess (although previously informed that the present works outvied
    all the previous attempts of the artiste) that we were unprepared
    for designs and executions so exquisitely chaste and artistic, and
    true in the imitation of nature. What could have induced the
    executive committee of the Great Exhibition to decide upon excluding
    works of such elaborate labour and beauty, and these the works of an
    English artist, of the first standing, we are totally at a loss to
    conjecture. We say "excluding," for it is tantamount to exclusion to
    tell Mrs. Peachey that she must place such volatile work in a top
    gallery, exposed to the heat of a July sun, or withdraw them,
    although she had been previously allocated space on the basement of
    the building. Mrs. Peachey adopted the latter alternative, feeling
    it detrimental to her works, not only from the objectionable
    position assigned her, but also from the impossibility of having her
    cases, which are of a large size, conveyed into the gallery, without
    materially injuring designs of so fragile a nature.

    It is to be regretted that Mrs. Peachey should be thus compelled to
    adopt a measure which has deprived the Exhibition of one of its
    rarest specimens of art, specimens which we are certain would
    severely test, if not outvie,--all other competitors in that
    department. We are glad to know, however, that the artiste's credit
    will not suffer from this harsh exclusion. The labour, skill, and
    expense she has bestowed are already duly appreciated by a
    discerning public, thousands of the _elite_ of the aristocracy and
    gentry having already visited Mrs. Peachey at her residence in
    Rathbone-place, all of whom have expressed the most unequivocal
    satisfaction and delight at the beauty of the specimens, which, they
    allege, are far superior to any in the Exhibition. We ourselves
    strongly recommend our fair readers to inspect these inimitable
    works, feeling certain that they will continue to be pronounced the
    finest works of the kind ever executed.--_Observer._

       *       *       *       *       *

    The complaints against the partiality and want of discrimination on
    the part of the executive committee of the Great Exhibition in the
    allotment of space to the would-be exhibitors are of daily and
    hourly recurrence. Among the grievances which are more especially
    injurious to the thorough development of British industry in the
    more delicate and refined art in feminine accomplishments, we may
    mention the case of Mrs. Peachey, of Rathbone-place, the "warranted"
    wax florist to Her Most Gracious Majesty. This lady, one of the
    earliest claimants for pedestal space, on the first announcement of
    the intended Congregation of the Industry of All Nations, we think,
    has been most harshly dealt by. Her first application was duly
    answered, and an allotment made her of space on the basement of the
    building near one of the fountains, and amongst the other gems of
    art. Subsequently, privately, she ascertained that some alteration
    was made with reference to her contributions; and, on application,
    it was intimated to her that, in consequence of "want of room," the
    executive had determined on transferring her cases to class 29,
    situated in one of the galleries. Mrs. Peachey, on inspecting the
    location, objected, on the just plea that wax flowers were liable to
    atmospheric influence from the great heat accruing from the glass
    roof and plate glass surrounding her flowers; and also their
    material and serious injury from the impracticability of moving her
    compositions, composed entirety of wax, up staircases without
    injuring her designs. The whole has resulted in the total exclusion
    of one of the most beautiful contributions, designed and arranged by
    one of our most honoured and worthy British Artists. Since Mrs.
    Peachey's exclusion has been known, her studio has been visited by
    the most aristocratic of the nobility and gentry, who have expressed
    the utmost indignation at her exclusion from the great competition
    in the World's Fair. The contributions, which occupy a small space,
    consist of the most rare exotic and indigenous flowers and fruits,
    which so closely imitate nature as nearly to deceive the spectator,
    and give him a desire to take and taste of the luscious banquet.
    Altogether the cases, which occupied her twelve months in
    completing, are worthy of inspection, a gratification which Mrs.
    Peachey affords the public by throwing open her rooms for public
    inspection. We recommend the admirers of imitative art to inspect
    these beautiful and artistic gems.--_Expositor._

       *       *       *       *       *

    A visit to Mrs. Peachey's Studio, in Rathbone-place, is like
    stepping into some garden of Fairy Land, where flowers of all
    seasons, and fruits of every clime present themselves at once to the
    eye in perennial bloom. The rose is there in all its varieties, the
    lily, the drooping fuchsia, the accasia, the gorgeous tulip, the
    dahlia, the Victoria Regia in all its stages of development, bud,
    blossom, flower. Grapes, too, that would have moved the jolly god to
    press them within his ruddy lips, peaches, nectarines, currants,
    strawberries, and crowning pine apples, in one rare trophy, worthy
    the study of a Lance. Our feelings at the moment recalled vividly an
    amusing anecdote of Swift. The facetious Dean with several friends
    was invited to walk the rounds and admire the fruit in the garden of
    an old acquaintance, who pointed out all the beauties of his
    orchard, without, however, asking the company to partake of any of
    the tempting display. This was too much for Swift, who having a
    happy art of inventing rhymes to suit his purposes, applied it in
    the following manner on the occasion; "I remember," said he,
    stopping under a very heavy laden bough, "that my dear old
    grandmother had a saying which ran thus--

        "Always pluck a peach
        When within your reach."

    Suiting the action to the word, he quickly put forth his hand and
    took and ate--an example which was not lost on those who accompanied
    him. Now we candidly confess that we were in an unguarded moment
    tempted to essay a similar onslaught on Mrs. Peachey's fruits, but,
    fortunately for all future visitors, were withheld by the
    magnificent glass shades which protect these triumphs of art. And
    are these the works that have been--that are refused a fitting place
    in that great field of universal rivalry, the Crystal Palace! What!
    can it be possible? Here are works of our own nation not
    there--excluded! Surely, for the credit of the artiste, and for its
    own honorable name, the Executive Committee should enquire into the
    matter, and if there be any unworthy motive for this, to us,
    incomprehensible exclusion of native art, let such be at once and
    for ever dissipated by the breath of public opinion. There is still
    ample space for them in the great building; and we hope yet to see
    them there in their proper place. Mrs. Peachey has spared neither
    labor nor expense to render her works worthy of her reputation, and
    the continuance of that exalted patronage which she has long enjoyed
    in Her Gracious Majesty the Queen, and the highest among the
    aristocracy, and of the honor of her country. We were glad to
    perceive, on our visit, that although excluded from their place
    among the nations, these exquisite works are eagerly sought after
    and admired by crowds of the _elite_ of fashion and taste.--_Globe._

       *       *       *       *       *

    This highly talented lady (artiste to Her Majesty) has now on
    private view, at her residence, 35, Rathbone-place, Oxford-street,
    two splendid works of art, which were intended to have been placed
    in the Crystal Palace, but the space allotted to her in one of the
    galleries, being not at all adapted to such delicate productions,
    Mrs. Peachey was compelled to refrain from carrying out her
    intention. These beautiful productions, the sole work of Mrs.
    Peachey, (who is self-taught,) comprise a monster bouquet of
    flowers, and a large vase of fruit. The former comprehends specimens
    of almost every flower known in this country, from the simple violet
    to the full-blown magnolia; whilst in the latter we have specimens
    of the principal English fruits, including the luscious pine apples
    and the unpretending currant. Both groups are most tastefully
    arranged, and an enormous expense has been incurred in the getting
    up of the stands and glass shades. We advise our readers not to omit
    seeing Mrs. Peachey's novel and truly beautiful works, and we
    predict they will be abundantly gratified by their visit to her
    Exhibition.--_Reading Mercury._

       *       *       *       *       *

    Mrs. Peachey's group of wax flowers, modelled for the Glass Palace,
    is now on view at her house in Rathbone-place. Mrs. Peachey, it
    seems, refused the space assigned her by the Committee, on the
    ground that heat and darkness would, the one have destroyed, and the
    other shrouded the marvels of her skill. The bouquet (which is in a
    glass case, unsurpassed for chasteness and beauty of design) is on a
    gigantic scale, and contains among the rarest exotics the pride of
    the conservatory and the garden. We were as much surprised as
    delighted, on paying a visit during the past week at the skill which
    can imitate, and even rival, nature in her most attractive aspects.
    Conspicuous among the lilies, and other water flowers lining the
    base, is the Victoria Regia in its several states. The botanist and
    the florist will dwell delightedly on the _cricæ_, _orchids_,
    _cacti_, the night-flowering cereus, etc., besides numberless others
    more familiar to us.--_Dispatch._

       *       *       *       *       *

    An exhibition of wax flowers, at the residence (in Rathbone-place)
    of Mrs. Peachey the artiste, is a perfect curiosity of its kind.
    Almost every variety of English flower, exquisitely coloured, is
    massed into an enormous bouquet, surprising alike from the largeness
    of the conception and the minuteness of the execution. This
    beautiful piece of art was prepared for the Great Exhibition, but
    withdrawn by Mrs. Peachey in consequence of her dissatisfaction with
    the place reserved for her.--_Examiner._

       *       *       *       *       *

    We have inspected, at the private residence of Mrs. Peachey (in
    Rathbone-place, Oxford-street), artiste in wax work to Her Majesty,
    one of the most remarkable specimens of ingenuity and industry which
    London at present contains. This is an immense bouquet of wax
    flowers which that lady had prepared for the Crystal Palace, but
    were not within its walls, for a reason to which we will presently
    advert. Let us first describe this really magnificent work. On four
    sturdy stone columns, tastefully designed, and edged with gold, is a
    looking-glass platform upwards of four feet square, and representing
    water. From the centre of this fairy lake rises a glass column
    supporting a golden basket. In this is placed a bouquet some two
    feet high, and of proportionate girth, in which are clustered all
    the flowers we ever saw, and a great many which we never saw--from
    the humble favorites of our _Rigolettes_ and _Fleur de Maries_, up
    to the floral aristocracy of the conservatory. There they are
    exquisitely reproduced in all their graces of form and colour, and
    arranged with the attention to contrast and general effect which
    bespeaks the superintending eye of a real artiste. We are afraid to
    say how many hundred wax flowers compose this splendid bouquet; but
    we can safely say that, after having walked round and round it, and,
    as we thought, having completely examined it, the eye continually
    insisted on detecting some new variety, and we finally abandoned the
    hope of ever becoming acquainted with the whole. From the corners of
    the imitative waters rise various superb specimens of water plants,
    fresh, cool, opaque-looking productions; and at the foot of the
    glass column, as if planted by accident, spring a few of our more
    common and very beautiful garden flowers. The whole is covered by an
    enormous bent glass shade, from the centre of which rises a pretty
    copy of Her Majesty's crown. Nothing can be more beautiful or in
    better taste than the object we have described. Near it is another
    vase, not so large, and filled with wax fruit of every kind--the
    bloom of the grape, the blush of the apple, the rich brown of the
    nut, the velvet of the apricot, the glow of the orange, and the
    characteristics of a hundred other fruits being represented with a
    tantalizing fidelity. We would have flogged the fellow who broke the
    Portland Vase, but we did not feel so sure, while gazing upon these
    admirable imitations of the most delicious fruits, that we should
    have been so severe upon some earnest gourmand who might dash down
    the vase of which we speak, in wrath that his eye and his palate had
    been so nobly cheated. The two vases, one of flowers, the other of
    fruits, are certainly the most sumptuous specimens of wax
    composition we ever saw.

    As we have said, these works were intended by Her Majesty's artiste
    for the Great Exhibition. On her applying for a site, that lady
    states, that a very admirable one was assigned her upon the
    ground-floor of the building, near the fountains. Upon her work
    being complete, she was directed to place it in the gallery. This
    Mrs. Peachey considered would be to jeopardise it, from the danger
    so fragile a production would probably sustain in being taken up
    stairs, and still more from the heat of the sun, to which the wax
    would in that situation be exposed, and which would speedily produce
    Icarian results destructive to the work. We are not disposed to
    enter into the question in any spirit of censure. We know too well
    the _innumerable difficulties_ with which the Executive Committee
    have had to contend in arranging the contents of the enormous
    building, to cavil at any decision they may have arrived at; but we
    have now had the opportunity of seeing two very beautiful works of
    English industry which would have been a credit to the
    Exhibition.--_Morning Chronicle._

       *       *       *       *       *

    Those forms which our continental neighbours take such wondrous care
    in imitating in the perishable material of muslin, Mrs. Peachey, Her
    Majesty's artiste, of 35, Rathbone-place, endeavours to perpetuate
    in the more endurable materials of wax. Naturally afraid of
    jeopardising the work on which so much time and labour has been
    bestowed, Mrs. Peachey has withheld her contribution from the Great
    Exhibition; whether wisely or not, we are not here called upon to
    pronounce.

    We can only bear witness to the evidently botanical fidelity of
    execution with which the forms and colours so lavishly spread
    throughout nature have been mimicked. In wax work generally, one is
    made painfully aware of the all-powerful presence of the forceps,
    but here we notice little or nothing of the kind, this is especially
    the case with the small blossoms, which expand their petals
    throughout a monster bouquet in wax.

    In thus perfecting the imitative arts, however, no sense should be
    left unsatisfied; to the pleasure of seeing, might be super-added
    that of smelling. But in this further aim might be lost sight of
    that great object, viz., utility, which at present is one of the
    aims successfully attained by Mrs. Peachey.--_Daily News._


FINIS.


W. N. HORTON, Printer, London and Greenwich.




Transcriber's Endnotes:

    The following significant errors have been corrected:

      Pg. xvi. "Lilium Lancefolium" to _Lilium Lancifolium_.
      Pg. xvi & 42. "Mignionette" to _Mignonette_.
      Pg. xvi. "Passa Flora" to _Passiflora_.
      Pg. xvi. "Tulip, Vanthols" to _Tulip, Van Thol_.
      Pg. xvi. "Cheiranthus Cheri" to _Cheiranthus Cheiri_.
      Pg. 13. "convolvolus" to _convolvulus_.
      Pg. 58. "Sir R. Scomburgh" to _Sir R. Schomburgk_.

    Spelling errors in the press extracts remain as printed, but have
    been noted below:

      Pg. 69. "accasia" should be _acacia_.
      Pg. 70. "cricæ" should be _cricæa_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Royal Guide to Wax Flower Modelling, by 
Emma Peachey

